@node Architecture
@chapter Architecture
@cindex architecture
@cindex AgentCore
@cindex component diagram

This chapter describes Codebud's internal structure: what each component
does, how data flows between them, and why the boundaries are drawn where
they are.

@menu
* Component Overview::          The six subsystems and their roles.
* The Agent Loop::              Data flow through a single request.
* AgentCore::                   The central orchestrator.
* LLMPlanner::                  Prompt construction and JSON parsing.
* SafetyEngine::                Two-layer validation.
* Executor::                    Step-by-step execution.
* Sandbox::                     Controlled command execution.
* MemoryStore::                 Persistent timeline.
* ToolRegistry::                Tool catalogue.
* LLM Stub::                    Backend-agnostic LLM interface.
* File Layout::                 Where everything lives on disk.
@end menu


@node Component Overview
@section Component Overview
@cindex subsystems

@example
                     user message
                          │
                     ┌────▼─────┐
                     │AgentCore │   orchestrates everything
                     └────┬─────┘
          ┌───────────────┼───────────────┐
          │               │               │
     ┌────▼────┐    ┌─────▼──────┐  ┌────▼──────┐
     │LLMPlanner│   │SafetyEngine│  │  Executor  │
     │          │   │            │  │            │
     │ prompt   │   │ validate   │  │ run steps  │
     │ parse    │   │ step-by-   │  │ stop on err│
     │ retry    │   │ step       │  └────┬───────┘
     └────┬─────┘   └────────────┘       │
          │                        ┌─────┴──────┐
     ┌────▼──────┐            ┌────▼────┐  ┌────▼──────┐
     │ LLM Stub  │            │  Tools  │  │MemoryStore│
     │ (Ollama / │            │ (7 built│  │ timeline  │
     │  OpenAI)  │            │  -ins)  │  │ on disk   │
     └───────────┘            └────┬────┘  └───────────┘
                                   │
                              ┌────▼────┐
                              │ Sandbox │
                              │ (shell  │
                              │  exec)  │
                              └─────────┘
@end example

@noindent
Each subsystem has a single responsibility and communicates only through
plain Python dicts.  No subsystem imports from the CLI layer.


@node The Agent Loop
@section The Agent Loop
@cindex agent loop

This is the full sequence of events for @command{codebud run "your request"}:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{CLI} parses the arguments and constructs an @code{AgentCore}.
@code{AgentCore.__init__} creates all subsystems in dependency order:
@code{Sandbox} → @code{ToolRegistry} → @code{SafetyEngine} →
@code{MemoryStore} → @code{LLMPlanner} → @code{Executor}.

@item
@strong{CLI} starts the @code{ProgressIndicator} thread, then calls
@code{AgentCore.handle_user_message(message, on_chunk=...)}.

@item
@strong{AgentCore} delegates to @code{LLMPlanner.generate_plan(message)}.

@item
@strong{LLMPlanner} calls @code{_build_prompt()}, which embeds the tool
catalogue (from @code{ToolRegistry.describe_tools()}) and safety rules
(from @code{SafetyEngine.describe_rules()}) into a structured few-shot
prompt.

@item
@strong{LLMPlanner} calls @code{call_llm(prompt, on_chunk=...)} via the
LLM stub.  Tokens stream back from Ollama; each fragment is forwarded to
@code{on_chunk}, which updates the progress display.

@item
@strong{LLMPlanner} strips any Markdown code fences from the raw output
and attempts @code{json.loads()}.  If parsing fails, it retries once
with a minimal JSON-only prompt.  If it fails again, it returns
@code{@{"status": "plan_error", ...@}}.

@item
@strong{LLMPlanner} validates the parsed JSON:
@code{_validate_plan_structure()} checks that every step has @code{id},
@code{description}, @code{tool}, and @code{args}; that the named tool
exists in the registry; and that @code{SafetyEngine.validate_step(step)}
passes.

@item
@strong{AgentCore} re-validates the returned plan with
@code{_validate_plan()} (same checks, defence-in-depth).

@item
@strong{CLI} receives the validated plan dict and prints it.  In
@command{run} mode it immediately calls @code{Executor.execute_plan()}.
In @command{chat} mode it prompts the user for @kbd{y/n/a/q} first.

@item
@strong{Executor} iterates the step list.  For each step it calls
@code{ToolRegistry.get(tool_name).run(args)}.  For @code{command} steps
this delegates to @code{Sandbox.run_command(cmd)}.

@item
@strong{Executor} calls @code{MemoryStore.add_snapshot(step, result)}
after each completed step.  The snapshot is persisted to
@file{data/memory/entries.json} immediately.

@item
@strong{Executor} stops and returns a @code{step_error} dict if any step
returns a non-zero @code{returncode} or raises an exception.

@item
@strong{CLI} prints the final one-line outcome per step (or full stdout
if @option{--verbose}).
@end enumerate


@node AgentCore
@section AgentCore
@cindex AgentCore

@code{AgentCore} is the entry point for all agent work.  The CLI creates
one instance and calls @code{handle_user_message()} once per turn.  In
@command{chat} mode the same instance is reused across turns so that
@code{MemoryStore} accumulates a session history.

@strong{Public API:}

@table @code
@item handle_user_message(message, on_chunk=None)
Generate a plan and return it.  Never executes steps.
Returns @code{@{"status": "ok", "plan": [...]@}} or
@code{@{"status": "plan_error", "error": "..."@}}.

@item regenerate(payload)
Re-plan using the last user message.  Called by OpenClaw when the user
clicks @emph{Regenerate}.
@end table

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/core.py}


@node LLMPlanner
@section LLMPlanner
@cindex LLMPlanner
@cindex prompt, construction
@cindex retry logic

@code{LLMPlanner} turns a user message into a validated plan dict.

@subsection Prompt construction

@code{_build_prompt()} assembles a structured prompt with five sections:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Critical rules} --- five numbered instructions telling the model
to output only JSON and to pick the right tool for each operation (e.g.
``use @code{command} not @code{file_read} to list directories'').

@item
@strong{Available tools} --- the output of @code{ToolRegistry.describe_tools()},
which lists each tool name, its description, and its @code{usage_hint}.

@item
@strong{Safety rules} --- the output of @code{SafetyEngine.describe_rules()},
which lists the harmless and powerful command prefixes.

@item
@strong{Response format} --- the exact JSON schema expected.

@item
@strong{Few-shot examples} --- six worked examples covering: list files,
read a file, run tests, write a file, a multi-step task, and a
@code{plan_error} for unsupported requests.
@end enumerate

@subsection Retry logic

@code{generate_plan()} makes at most two LLM calls:

@enumerate
@item
First call with the full prompt.  If @code{json.loads()} succeeds and the
plan validates, it is returned immediately.  If parsing fails, @code{None}
is returned from @code{_attempt()} to signal a retry.

@item
Retry with @code{_build_retry_prompt()}: a minimal two-paragraph prompt
that says only ``output valid JSON'' and lists the tool names.  Most
models that returned prose on the first try respond correctly here.

@item
If both attempts fail, @code{plan_error: "LLM returned invalid JSON"} is
returned.
@end enumerate

An empty LLM response short-circuits the retry: it returns
@code{plan_error: "LLM returned empty output"} immediately without a
second call.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/planner.py}


@node SafetyEngine
@section SafetyEngine
@cindex SafetyEngine
@cindex safety validation

@code{SafetyEngine} is consulted at two points: during plan validation
inside @code{LLMPlanner._validate_plan_structure()} and again inside
@code{AgentCore._validate_plan()}.  This double-check provides
defence-in-depth.

@code{validate_step(step)} applies a single rule for @code{command} steps:
the @code{cmd} value must start with a prefix listed in either
@file{harmless_commands.json} or @file{powerful_commands.json}.  If not,
the step is rejected and the whole plan fails validation with
@code{"LLM returned malformed plan"}.

All other tool types (@code{file_write}, @code{file_read}, @code{patch},
@code{web_search}, @code{embed}, @code{search_embeddings}) are accepted
unconditionally at the @code{SafetyEngine} level; the Sandbox provides a
second layer of protection for shell commands only.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/safety.py}


@node Executor
@section Executor
@cindex Executor
@cindex step execution

@code{Executor.execute_plan(plan_output)} walks the @code{plan} array and
executes each step in sequence.

For each step:

@enumerate
@item Look up the tool instance via @code{ToolRegistry.get(tool_name)}.
@item Call @code{tool.run(args)}.
@item Validate the result dict has @code{stdout}, @code{stderr}, @code{returncode}.
@item Append a snapshot to @code{MemoryStore}.
@item If @code{returncode != 0}, return @code{@{"status": "step_error"@}}.
@end enumerate

The executor returns @code{@{"status": "ok", "results": @{step_id: result, ...@}@}}
when all steps succeed.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/executor.py}


@node Sandbox
@section Sandbox
@cindex Sandbox
@cindex subprocess
@cindex timeout

@code{Sandbox.run_command(cmd)} is the only place in Codebud where a
subprocess is launched.  It provides a lightweight second safety layer
independent of the JSON policy files.

@table @strong
@item Hard-blocked patterns
The sandbox always blocks: @code{rm -rf /}, @code{rm -rf *},
@code{shutdown}, @code{reboot}, and the classic fork bomb
(@code{:()@{:|:&@};:}).  These are checked before the command is passed to
@code{subprocess.run()}.

@item Timeout
Every command has a 10-second wall-clock timeout enforced by
@code{subprocess.run(timeout=...)}.  A timed-out command returns
@code{returncode=1} and a timeout message in @code{stderr}.

@item No shell expansion
Commands are split with @code{shlex.split()} and passed as a list, so
shell metacharacters (@code{&&}, @code{|}, @code{>}) are not interpreted.
@end table

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/sandbox.py}


@node MemoryStore
@section MemoryStore
@cindex MemoryStore
@cindex memory timeline
@cindex data/memory/entries.json

@code{MemoryStore} maintains a chronological list of execution snapshots.
Each snapshot contains:

@example
@{
  "timestamp": "2026-04-23T15:30:00.000000",
  "data": @{
    "step":   @{ "id": "step_0", "tool": "command", "args": @{...@} @},
    "result": @{ "stdout": "...", "stderr": "", "returncode": 0 @}
  @}
@}
@end example

Snapshots are appended to @file{data/memory/entries.json} after every
completed step and are persisted immediately, so a crash mid-plan does not
lose earlier results.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/memory.py}


@node ToolRegistry
@section ToolRegistry
@cindex ToolRegistry

@code{ToolRegistry} holds the seven built-in tool instances and provides
three methods:

@table @code
@item get(name)
Return the tool instance.

@item has(name)
Return @code{True} if the tool exists.

@item describe_tools()
Return a multi-line string for the planner prompt: one line per tool with
its name and @code{description}, plus an indented @samp{When to use:}
line taken from its @code{usage_hint} attribute.
@end table

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/tools/tool_registry.py}


@node LLM Stub
@section LLM Stub
@cindex llm_stub.py
@cindex LLM backends

@file{agent/llm_stub.py} exposes a single public function:
@code{call_llm(prompt, timeout=600.0, on_chunk=None)}.

It selects a backend in this priority order:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Ollama} (preferred) --- if @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} is set and the
server at @env{OLLAMA_BASE_URL} responds to @code{GET /api/tags}.  Uses
@code{POST /api/generate} with @code{stream=True} and
@code{temperature=0}.

@item
@strong{OpenAI} (fallback) --- if @env{OPENAI_API_KEY} is set.  Uses a
non-streaming @code{ChatCompletion} call with @code{temperature=0}.

@item
@strong{No-op} --- logs a warning and returns an empty string, which the
planner converts to @code{plan_error}.
@end enumerate

The @code{on_chunk} callback receives each text fragment from the Ollama
streaming response.  The CLI passes @code{ProgressIndicator.on_chunk} here
to drive the live token counter without coupling display logic to the LLM
layer.


@node File Layout
@section File Layout
@cindex file layout
@cindex directory structure

@example
agent/
├── core.py            AgentCore orchestrator
├── planner.py         LLMPlanner (prompt + parse + retry)
├── executor.py        Executor (step-by-step runner)
├── safety.py          SafetyEngine (policy validation)
├── sandbox.py         Sandbox (subprocess + timeout)
├── memory.py          MemoryStore (timeline persistence)
├── llm_stub.py        call_llm() (Ollama / OpenAI)
└── tools/
    ├── tool_registry.py   ToolRegistry
    ├── file_io.py         file_write, file_read
    ├── commands.py        command
    ├── patcher.py         patch
    ├── web_search.py      web_search
    └── embeddings.py      embed, search_embeddings

agent/cli/
├── display.py         ProgressIndicator, plan printer, step printer
├── doctor.py          health checks
└── errors.py          error → fix lookup table

config/
├── harmless_commands.json
├── powerful_commands.json
└── trusted_sequences.json

data/
├── memory/entries.json        execution timeline (auto-created)
└── embeddings/index.json      embedding index (auto-created)

openclaw/
└── SKILL.md           OpenClaw skill definition

run_agent.py           CLI entry point (codebud binary)
@end example
