@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration
@cindex configuration

Codebud has no configuration file of its own.  All runtime behaviour is
controlled through environment variables and through the JSON policy files
in the @file{config/} directory.  This chapter documents both.

@menu
* Environment Variables Overview::  Variables that control Codebud.
* LLM Backend Variables::           Choosing Ollama or OpenAI.
* Feature Flags::                   Enabling optional features.
* Policy JSON Files::               The three safety configuration files.
* Harmless Commands::               Commands always allowed.
* Powerful Commands::               Commands allowed with care.
* Trusted Sequences::               Named multi-step sequences.
* Checking Your Configuration::     Using codebud config.
@end menu


@node Environment Variables Overview
@section Environment Variables Overview
@cindex environment variables

The table below lists every variable Codebud reads, its default, and what
it does.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .25 .50
@headitem Variable @tab Default @tab Purpose
@item @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}
@tab @emph{(none)}
@tab Model name exactly as it appears in @command{ollama list}.
Required for the Ollama backend.
@item @env{OLLAMA_BASE_URL}
@tab @code{http://localhost:11434}
@tab Base URL of the Ollama REST API.
@item @env{EMBED_MODEL}
@tab same as @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}
@tab Model used for generating embeddings.  Override to use a different
model for the @code{embed} tool without changing the planning model.
@item @env{OPENAI_API_KEY}
@tab @emph{(none)}
@tab When set, enables the OpenAI fallback backend if Ollama is
unavailable.
@item @env{OPENAI_MODEL}
@tab @code{gpt-3.5-turbo}
@tab OpenAI model to use when the OpenAI backend is active.
@item @env{WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED}
@tab @code{0}
@tab Set to @code{1} to enable the @code{web_search} tool.  When
@code{0}, the tool reports itself as unavailable to the planner.
@end multitable

To see the resolved value of every variable, run:

@example
codebud config
@end example

To make a variable permanent, add it to your shell profile:

@example
echo 'export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M' >> ~/.zshrc
@end example


@node LLM Backend Variables
@section LLM Backend Variables
@cindex LLM backend
@cindex Ollama backend
@cindex OpenAI backend

Codebud supports two LLM backends, selected by priority:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Ollama} (preferred) --- used when @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} is set and
the Ollama server at @env{OLLAMA_BASE_URL} is reachable.
Codebud streams tokens using @code{stream=True} so that the HTTP
connection never times out during the long prefill phase on CPU-only
hardware.

@item
@strong{OpenAI} (fallback) --- used when @env{OPENAI_API_KEY} is set and
Ollama is not configured or not reachable.  The OpenAI call is
non-streaming and uses @code{temperature=0} for deterministic output.
@end enumerate

If neither backend is configured, @command{codebud} logs a warning and
returns an empty string to the planner, which triggers a @code{plan_error}.

@subsection Pointing at a remote Ollama instance

If you run Ollama on a separate machine (for example, a desktop with more
RAM), change @env{OLLAMA_BASE_URL}:

@example
export OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://192.168.1.50:11434
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "your task"
@end example

Codebud does not require the model to be on the same machine as the CLI.


@node Feature Flags
@section Feature Flags
@cindex feature flags
@cindex web search, enabling

@table @env
@item WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED
Default: @code{0} (disabled).  Set to @code{1} (or @code{true} or
@code{yes}) to enable the @code{web_search} tool.  When enabled, the tool
sends a POST request to @code{https://lite.duckduckgo.com/lite/} and
parses the HTML response.  No API key is required.

@example
WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED=1 codebud run "find the latest Python release notes"
@end example

When disabled, the @code{web_search} tool's description in the planner
prompt is replaced with a notice so the planner knows not to use it.
@end table


@node Policy JSON Files
@section Policy JSON Files
@cindex policy files
@cindex config/ directory

The @file{config/} directory contains three JSON files that the
@code{SafetyEngine} loads at startup.  You can edit them without restarting
Codebud --- they are re-read each time @code{AgentCore} is initialised.

@table @file
@item config/harmless_commands.json
Commands that are always permitted.  @xref{Harmless Commands}.

@item config/powerful_commands.json
Commands that modify the filesystem or process state.  They are permitted
but the planner is warned to use them carefully.  @xref{Powerful Commands}.

@item config/trusted_sequences.json
Named multi-step sequences that the planner may propose as a unit.
@xref{Trusted Sequences}.
@end table

All three files must be valid JSON arrays.  If a file is missing or
malformed, the @code{SafetyEngine} treats that list as empty and logs a
warning.  @command{codebud doctor} validates all three files on startup.


@node Harmless Commands
@section Harmless Commands
@cindex harmless_commands.json

@file{config/harmless_commands.json} contains a JSON array of command
prefixes that are always permitted.  The @code{SafetyEngine} accepts a
@code{command} step when its @code{cmd} argument starts with any listed
prefix.

Default content:

@example
[
  "echo",
  "cat",
  "ls",
  "pwd",
  "whoami",
  "python",
  "python3"
]
@end example

To allow additional read-only tools:

@example
[
  "echo",
  "cat",
  "ls",
  "pwd",
  "whoami",
  "python",
  "python3",
  "head",
  "tail",
  "wc",
  "file",
  "stat",
  "find",
  "tree",
  "diff",
  "git log",
  "git status",
  "git diff",
  "pytest"
]
@end example

@strong{Note:} the match is prefix-based.  Adding @code{"git"} permits
@emph{all} git subcommands, including @command{git push} and
@command{git reset --hard}.  Be specific: add @code{"git log"},
@code{"git status"}, and @code{"git diff"} separately rather than the
bare @code{"git"}.


@node Powerful Commands
@section Powerful Commands
@cindex powerful_commands.json

@file{config/powerful_commands.json} contains prefixes for commands that
are permitted but can modify state.  The safety engine allows them exactly
as it does harmless commands; the separate list is a signal to the planner
prompt that these commands deserve extra care.

Default content:

@example
[
  "grep",
  "sed",
  "awk",
  "cp",
  "mv"
]
@end example

Common additions for a developer workflow:

@example
[
  "grep",
  "sed",
  "awk",
  "cp",
  "mv",
  "mkdir",
  "touch",
  "chmod",
  "pip install",
  "npm install",
  "git add",
  "git commit"
]
@end example

@strong{Warning:} do not add @code{"rm"}, @code{"sudo"}, or
@code{"shutdown"} to either list.  The sandbox has a separate hard-coded
block for the most destructive patterns (@pxref{The Sandbox}).


@node Trusted Sequences
@section Trusted Sequences
@cindex trusted_sequences.json

@file{config/trusted_sequences.json} is a JSON array of named
multi-step sequences.  Each entry has a @code{name} and a @code{sequence}
of command prefixes:

@example
[
  @{
    "name": "install_python_package",
    "sequence": ["python3 -m pip install"]
  @}
]
@end example

The @code{SafetyEngine} loads this file but the current implementation does
not apply sequence-level validation beyond what the step-by-step check
already covers.  The file is reserved for future expansion --- for example,
requiring that @command{pip install} is always followed by a test run
before any commit.


@node Checking Your Configuration
@section Checking Your Configuration
@cindex codebud config
@cindex codebud doctor

Two subcommands help verify your configuration:

@table @command
@item codebud config
Prints the resolved value of every environment variable, including
defaults.  Use this to confirm that your exported variables are
being read correctly.

@example
codebud config
@end example

Example output:

@example
Codebud resolved configuration:
  OLLAMA_MODEL       = qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
  OLLAMA_BASE_URL    = http://localhost:11434
  EMBED_MODEL        = qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
  OPENAI_API_KEY     = (not set)
  WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED = 0
@end example

@item codebud doctor
Checks each configuration value for correctness: whether the Ollama server
is reachable, whether the selected model has been pulled, and whether the
three policy JSON files parse without errors.  Each check prints
@samp{[PASS]} or @samp{[FAIL]} with a one-line fix command.

@example
codebud doctor
@end example
@end table
