@node Development
@chapter Development
@cindex development
@cindex contributing

This chapter is for developers who want to modify Codebud: run the test
suite, add a new tool, tune the planner prompt, or understand the
conventions used throughout the codebase.

@menu
* Test Suite::                  Running and understanding the tests.
* Code Style::                  Ruff configuration and formatting.
* Adding a Tool::               The five-step tool-addition checklist.
* Tuning the Planner Prompt::   Improving JSON reliability.
* Adding a Safety Rule::        Expanding or restricting what runs.
* Project Conventions::         Naming, imports, type hints, comments.
@end menu


@node Test Suite
@section Test Suite
@cindex test suite
@cindex pytest

@subsection Running the tests

@example
make test          @r{# run all tests (quiet)}
make check         @r{# alias for test}
make coverage      @r{# tests + branch coverage → htmlcov/}
@end example

Or invoke pytest directly for a single test:

@example
pytest tests/test_planner.py::TestRetryLogic::test_prose_first_then_valid_json_retry -v
@end example

All tests pass without a running Ollama server.  Tests that would require
network access use @code{unittest.mock.patch} to replace @code{call_llm}.

@subsection Test layout

@example
tests/
├── test_cli.py              21 tests — subcommand routing, doctor,
│                            display, error formatter
├── test_llm_stub.py         LLM stub: Ollama path, OpenAI path, fallback
├── test_planner.py          15 tests — prompt content, retry logic,
│                            step validation
└── test_openclaw_skill.py   10 tests — SKILL.md content, binary
                             availability, openclaw integration
@end example

@subsection Test conventions

@itemize
@item
@strong{No live network.}  All LLM calls are mocked with
@code{patch("agent.planner.call_llm", ...)} or equivalent.

@item
@strong{No live Ollama required.}  @code{test_llm_stub.py} patches
@code{requests.get} and @code{requests.post} to simulate server responses.

@item
@strong{Fixtures are local.}  Helper factories (@code{_make_registry()},
@code{_make_safety()}, @code{_good_plan()}) are defined at the top of each
test file, not in a shared @file{conftest.py}.

@item
@strong{Class-per-concern.}  Tests are grouped into classes
(@code{TestPromptContent}, @code{TestRetryLogic}, @code{TestValidation})
for readability without requiring the overhead of @code{unittest.TestCase}.
@end itemize


@node Code Style
@section Code Style
@cindex ruff
@cindex code style
@cindex PEP 8

Code style is enforced by @command{ruff}.  The configuration lives in
@file{pyproject.toml} under @code{[tool.ruff.lint]}:

@example
make lint      @r{# check for style violations}
make format    @r{# auto-format + auto-fix (safe fixes only)}
@end example

@strong{Active rule sets:}

@table @code
@item E, W
@command{pycodestyle} errors and warnings.

@item F
@command{pyflakes} (unused imports, undefined names).

@item I
@command{isort} (import ordering: stdlib → third-party → first-party).

@item UP
@command{pyupgrade} (replace deprecated @code{typing.Dict}/List/Tuple etc.@:
with built-in equivalents for Python @geq{}3.10).

@item B
@command{flake8-bugbear} (@code{zip(strict=True)}, ambiguous variable
names, etc.).
@end table

Line length is 100 characters.  @code{E501} (line-too-long) is suppressed
because @command{ruff format} handles wrapping.

Type annotations use built-in generics (@code{dict}, @code{list},
@code{tuple}) rather than @code{typing.Dict} etc., and the
@code{X | None} union syntax instead of @code{Optional[X]}.  Both are
available from Python 3.10 onward, which is the minimum supported version.


@node Adding a Tool
@section Adding a Tool
@cindex adding a tool

Follow this five-step checklist to add a new tool.

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Create the tool class.}  Add a new file (or a class to an existing
file) under @file{agent/tools/}.  The class must have:

@example
class MyTool:
    description = "One sentence for the planner prompt."
    usage_hint  = (
        "When to use me and what args are required. "
        'Required args: "foo" (str), "bar" (int).'
    )

    def run(self, args: dict[str, Any]) -> dict[str, Any]:
        foo = args.get("foo")
        if not foo:
            return @{"stdout": "", "stderr": "Missing: foo", "returncode": 1@}
        # ... do work ...
        return @{"stdout": result, "stderr": "", "returncode": 0@}
@end example

@item
@strong{Register it.}  In @file{agent/tools/tool_registry.py},
add an import and a @code{_register} call:

@example
from .my_module import MyTool
# ... inside __init__ ...
self._register("my_tool", MyTool())
@end example

@item
@strong{Add to the safety policy} (if the tool runs shell commands).
Edit @file{config/harmless_commands.json} or
@file{config/powerful_commands.json} to whitelist any command prefixes
the tool produces.

@item
@strong{Write tests.}  Add a test class to the appropriate file in
@file{tests/}.  At minimum:

@itemize
@item
Test that the tool returns @code{returncode=0} and the expected
@code{stdout} on valid input.

@item
Test that it returns @code{returncode=1} when required args are missing.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Add a few-shot example} to @code{LLMPlanner._FEW_SHOT_EXAMPLES}
in @file{agent/planner.py} if the new tool represents a common pattern.
Without an example, the planner will rarely use it.
@end enumerate

@subsection Checklist summary

@example
[ ] agent/tools/my_module.py     — class with description, usage_hint, run()
[ ] agent/tools/tool_registry.py — registered with _register()
[ ] config/harmless_commands.json — updated if needed
[ ] tests/                       — new test cases pass
[ ] agent/planner.py             — few-shot example added
@end example


@node Tuning the Planner Prompt
@section Tuning the Planner Prompt
@cindex planner prompt, tuning
@cindex few-shot examples

The planner prompt is assembled in @code{LLMPlanner._build_prompt()} in
@file{agent/planner.py}.  The most effective ways to improve JSON
reliability are:

@table @strong
@item Add or refine few-shot examples
The class attribute @code{_FEW_SHOT_EXAMPLES} contains six worked examples.
If the model consistently picks the wrong tool for a specific pattern,
add an example that shows the correct choice.  The format is:

@example
Example N --- <short description>:
User: "<user message>"
Response:
@{"status": "ok", "plan": [...]@}
@end example

@item Add a CRITICAL RULE
The prompt has a numbered @samp{CRITICAL RULES} section at the top.
Add a rule when the model makes a systematic mistake.  For example, rule 3
was added because the 3B model repeatedly used @code{file_read} with
@code{path: "."} instead of @code{command} with @code{cmd: "ls"}.

@item Improve usage_hint text
Each tool class has a @code{usage_hint} attribute.  @code{ToolRegistry.describe_tools()}
includes it in the prompt under the tool's name.  Make the hint concrete:
say what the required args are and give a one-line @code{@{"arg": "value"@}}
example.

@item Test with a fixed battery
After any prompt change, run the five standard requests from Phase E of the
development plan:

@example
codebud plan "list files in current directory"
codebud plan "read README.md and summarize it"
codebud plan "run the tests and tell me which ones fail"
codebud plan "create hello.py that prints Hello, world"
codebud plan "refactor agent/planner.py to add a docstring at the top"
@end example

The @option{--json} flag lets you inspect the raw plan for each.  Track
how many plans are correct to measure whether the change helped.
@end table


@node Adding a Safety Rule
@section Adding a Safety Rule
@cindex safety rules, adding

@subsection Allow a new command

Edit @file{config/harmless_commands.json} to add a prefix:

@example
[
  "echo", "cat", "ls", "pwd", "whoami", "python", "python3",
  "pytest",
  "git log", "git status", "git diff"
]
@end example

Save the file.  The change takes effect on the next @command{codebud run}
invocation without restarting anything.

@subsection Restrict a command

Remove the prefix from the JSON file.  The @code{SafetyEngine} will reject
any plan step whose @code{cmd} starts with that prefix.

@subsection Add a hard block in the Sandbox

Hard blocks cannot be added via config files; they must be edited directly
in @file{agent/sandbox.py}:

@example
dangerous_patterns = [
    "rm -rf /",
    "rm -rf *",
    "shutdown",
    "reboot",
    ":()@{:|:&@};:",
    "dd if=/dev/zero",     @r{← new entry}
]
@end example

This pattern is checked as a substring anywhere in the command string.


@node Project Conventions
@section Project Conventions
@cindex conventions
@cindex naming conventions

@table @strong
@item Virtual environment
Always @file{.venv/} (not @file{venv/}).  Created by @command{make venv}.

@item Editable install
Use @command{make install-dev} (which runs @code{pip install -e ".[dev]"}).
This places the @command{codebud} binary in @file{.venv/bin/codebud} and
makes both @code{agent} and @code{run_agent} importable without
@code{PYTHONPATH} hacks.

@item No comments by default
Comments are reserved for non-obvious constraints or workarounds.  Code
that reads naturally from its identifiers should have no comment.

@item No @code{typing.Dict}/List/Optional
Use built-in generics: @code{dict[str, Any]}, @code{list[str]},
@code{X | None}.  These are available in Python 3.10+.

@item Tool contract
Every tool @code{run()} method returns exactly:
@code{@{"stdout": str, "stderr": str, "returncode": int@}}.  Never raise
an exception from @code{run()} --- catch and return @code{returncode=1}.

@item Commit style
GNU-style: short subject line, blank line, body paragraphs.  One commit
per tested step.  No @code{Co-Authored-By} trailer.

@item Tests first
Write at least one test before adding a new feature.  All tests must pass
without a live Ollama server.
@end table
