@node Glossary
@chapter Glossary
@cindex glossary

@table @dfn

@item Agent
A software system that perceives inputs, plans actions, and executes tools
to accomplish a goal.  Codebud's agent receives natural-language requests
and acts on the local filesystem.

@item AgentCore
The central Python class in @file{agent/core.py} that owns all subsystems
(planner, safety engine, executor, memory, tool registry, sandbox) and
exposes @code{handle_user_message()} to the CLI.

@item Chunk
A fragment of text returned by the model during streaming generation.
Codebud's @code{on_chunk} callback receives each chunk as it arrives and
forwards it to the @code{ProgressIndicator}.

@item Code fence
Markdown syntax that wraps a code block: @code{```json ... ```}.  Some
models wrap their JSON output in code fences despite being instructed not
to.  @code{LLMPlanner._strip_code_fence()} removes them before parsing.

@item Context window
The maximum number of tokens an LLM can process in a single call --- both
input (prompt) and output (generated text) combined.  The 3B Qwen model
has a context window of approximately 32,768 tokens, though Ollama defaults
to a smaller @code{num_ctx} for speed.

@item Cosine similarity
A measure of similarity between two vectors: the cosine of the angle
between them, ranging from @minus{}1 (opposite) to +1 (identical
direction).  Used by @code{search_embeddings} to rank stored entries
against a query embedding.

@item Doctor
The @command{codebud doctor} subcommand.  It runs eight health checks and
prints a @samp{[PASS]} or @samp{[FAIL]} line for each, with a one-line fix
command for every failure.

@item Editable install
A @command{pip install -e .} installation where the package's source
directory is added directly to @code{sys.path} so changes to the source
files are reflected immediately without reinstalling.  The @command{codebud}
binary is placed in @file{.venv/bin/}.

@item Embedding
A fixed-length list of floating-point numbers that encodes the semantic
meaning of a piece of text.  Texts with similar meaning have embeddings
that point in similar directions in high-dimensional space.  Codebud
generates embeddings with Ollama's @code{/api/embed} endpoint.

@item Embedding index
The file @file{data/embeddings/index.json}.  It stores a list of
@code{@{text, vector@}} pairs.  The @code{search_embeddings} tool loads this
file and returns the entries whose vectors are closest to the query vector.

@item Executor
The Python class in @file{agent/executor.py} that walks a validated plan
and calls each tool in sequence.  It stops on the first non-zero return
code and records every completed step in the @code{MemoryStore}.

@item Few-shot example
A worked example embedded in the LLM's prompt that demonstrates the
expected input/output format.  Codebud's planner prompt contains six
examples covering common request patterns.  Few-shot examples are the most
reliable way to steer a small model toward correct JSON output.

@item Generation phase
The second phase of an LLM call.  After the model has processed the entire
input prompt (prefill), it generates output tokens one at a time.  The
@code{ProgressIndicator} shows a token counter and tokens-per-second rate
during this phase.

@item Harmless commands
Commands listed in @file{config/harmless_commands.json}.  They are
unconditionally allowed by the @code{SafetyEngine}.

@item JSON plan
The structured output produced by the @code{LLMPlanner}: a dict with
@code{"status": "ok"} and a @code{"plan"} array of step dicts, each
containing @code{id}, @code{description}, @code{tool}, and @code{args}.

@item LLM (Large Language Model)
A neural network trained on large amounts of text that can generate
human-like text continuations given a prompt.  Codebud uses Qwen2.5-Coder
served by Ollama.

@item Memory timeline
The persistent log in @file{data/memory/entries.json}.  After each
executed step, the @code{MemoryStore} appends a snapshot with the
timestamp, step metadata, and tool output.  The timeline accumulates
across sessions.

@item Model
In the context of Codebud, @dfn{model} refers to a specific set of LLM
weights --- for example, @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M}.  The
model is identified by name in @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} and served by the Ollama
server.

@item on_chunk
A Python callback @code{Callable[[str], None]} that the CLI passes through
the call stack (AgentCore → LLMPlanner → call_llm → _call_ollama) to
receive streaming token fragments without coupling display logic to the LLM
layer.

@item Ollama
A lightweight local server that loads LLM model weights into RAM and
exposes them through a JSON REST API on @code{localhost:11434}.  Codebud
uses Ollama's @code{/api/generate} endpoint (streaming) and
@code{/api/embed} endpoint (embeddings).

@item Plan error
The response @code{@{"status": "plan_error", "error": "..."@}} returned by
@code{AgentCore.handle_user_message()} when the planner cannot produce a
valid plan.  Common causes: the model returned empty output, invalid JSON,
or a plan that failed safety validation.

@item Plan step
One element of the @code{"plan"} array in a JSON plan.  Each step
specifies one tool call: @code{id}, @code{description}, @code{tool},
and @code{args}.

@item Planner
@code{LLMPlanner} in @file{agent/planner.py}.  It builds the prompt,
calls the LLM, strips code fences, parses JSON, validates the plan
structure, and retries once on parse failure.

@item Powerful commands
Commands listed in @file{config/powerful_commands.json}.  They are
permitted by the @code{SafetyEngine} but flagged in the planner prompt as
commands that modify state and should be used with care.

@item Prefill phase
The first phase of an LLM call.  The model processes the entire input
prompt token-by-token before generating any output.  On CPU-only hardware
this can take several minutes.  The @code{ProgressIndicator} shows a
spinner and elapsed time during this phase.

@item ProgressIndicator
The class in @file{agent/cli/display.py} that runs a background thread to
display a spinner during prefill and a token counter during generation.
It writes to @code{stderr} using @code{\r} to update in place without
scrolling.

@item Prompt
The text sent to the LLM.  Codebud's planning prompt contains critical
rules, a tool catalogue, safety rules, a JSON response format, six
few-shot examples, and the user's request.

@item Quantisation
A compression technique that reduces model weight precision from 32-bit
floats to 4- or 8-bit integers.  @code{q4_K_M} means 4-bit quantisation
using the K-quants method (medium variant).  Quantisation reduces the model
file size and RAM requirement by roughly 8x with modest accuracy
loss.

@item Sandbox
The @code{Sandbox} class in @file{agent/sandbox.py}.  It wraps
@code{subprocess.run()}, enforces a 10-second timeout, blocks a small
set of hard-coded dangerous patterns, and prevents shell expansion by
using @code{shlex.split()}.

@item SafetyEngine
The @code{SafetyEngine} class in @file{agent/safety.py}.  It loads the
three policy JSON files and applies prefix-based validation to every
@code{command} step in a plan.

@item Skill (OpenClaw)
A @file{SKILL.md} file that teaches the OpenClaw agent how to invoke a
CLI tool.  The OpenClaw gateway discovers skills from
@file{~/.openclaw/skills/} and injects their Markdown content into its
agent's context.

@item Stamp file
A zero-byte file whose modification time tracks whether a Makefile target
is up to date.  Codebud uses @file{.venv/.stamp-venv} and
@file{.venv/.stamp-dev} to avoid re-running @command{pip install} on every
@command{make test} invocation.

@item Step error
The response @code{@{"status": "step_error", "error": "..."@}} returned by
@code{Executor.execute_plan()} when a tool call returns a non-zero exit
code or raises an exception.  Execution stops at the failed step.

@item Streaming
Receiving LLM output token-by-token as it is generated rather than waiting
for the complete response.  Codebud uses @code{stream=True} in the Ollama
API call so that the HTTP read timeout never fires during the long prefill
phase on CPU-only hardware.

@item Token
The fundamental unit of LLM input and output.  Roughly one word, or
one to four characters for English text.  Codebud's planning prompts are
typically 350--400 tokens; generated plans are 50--100 tokens.

@item Token rate
Tokens generated per second during the generation phase.  For the 3B model
on an i7-8550U CPU the typical rate is approximately 1.1@tie{}t/s.

@item Tool
A Python class with a @code{run(args: dict) -> dict} method that performs
one operation.  Tools are the only way the agent interacts with the outside
world.  The seven built-in tools are @code{file_write}, @code{file_read},
@code{command}, @code{patch}, @code{web_search}, @code{embed}, and
@code{search_embeddings}.

@item ToolRegistry
The @code{ToolRegistry} class in @file{agent/tools/tool_registry.py}.
It holds the seven tool instances and provides @code{get()}, @code{has()},
and @code{describe_tools()} to the planner and executor.

@item Unified diff
A standard text format for representing changes to a file.  Lines starting
with @code{-} were removed; lines starting with @code{+} were added.
The @code{patch} tool applies unified diffs produced by @command{diff -u}
or @command{git diff}.

@item usage_hint
A class attribute on every tool that gives the planner concrete guidance:
when to use the tool, what arguments it requires, and a one-line example.
@code{ToolRegistry.describe_tools()} includes these hints in the planner
prompt.

@end table
