@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation

This chapter walks you through installing everything Codebud needs on
Arch Linux: system packages, Ollama, the Python virtual environment, and
the Codebud package itself.  If you are on another distribution, the
steps are the same in spirit --- substitute your package manager where
@command{pacman} appears.

@menu
* System Requirements::         What hardware and OS you need.
* System Packages::             Installing Python, Node.js, and build tools.
* Installing Ollama::           Getting the local LLM server.
* Cloning Codebud::             Getting the source code.
* Python Environment::          Creating the virtual environment and installing deps.
* Build System::                GNU-standard Makefile targets.
* Verifying the Install::       Running a quick sanity check.
@end menu


@node System Requirements
@section System Requirements
@cindex system requirements

@table @strong
@item OS
Arch Linux (rolling).  Other systemd-based distributions work with minor
adjustments.
@item RAM
8 GB minimum (for the 3B model).  16 GB recommended.
@item Disk
~3 GB for the recommended model, plus ~100 MB for the code and venv.
@item CPU
Any modern x86-64.  No GPU required; see @ref{Choosing a Model} for
speed expectations.
@item Network
Required once to install packages and pull the model.  The agent itself
runs fully offline after that.
@end table


@node System Packages
@section System Packages
@cindex pacman
@cindex system packages

First make sure your system is up to date:

@example
sudo pacman -Syu
@end example

Then install the required packages in one command:

@example
sudo pacman -S python python-pip python-virtualenv \
               git curl base-devel nodejs npm
@end example

@table @strong
@item python, python-pip, python-virtualenv
Codebud and all its dependencies are pure Python.
@item git
Required to clone the repository.
@item curl, base-devel
Used when building native extensions (some pip packages compile C code).
@item nodejs, npm
Required if you want to install or run the OpenClaw gateway CLI
(@command{openclaw}).  Not needed to run Codebud on its own.
@end table

Verify the key tools are present:

@example
python --version    # expect Python 3.11 or later
git --version
node --version
@end example


@node Installing Ollama
@section Installing Ollama
@cindex Ollama, installation
@cindex AUR

Ollama is the local LLM server.  Codebud sends every prompt to it
over a local HTTP connection.

@subsection Option A --- AUR (recommended on Arch)

If you have an AUR helper installed, use it so that Ollama is managed
by pacman and upgrades cleanly:

@example
yay -S ollama
# or:
paru -S ollama
@end example

@subsection Option B --- Official installer script

If you do not use the AUR, the official script works on any distribution:

@example
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
@end example

This installs @file{/usr/local/bin/ollama} and optionally a systemd unit.

@strong{Note:} the AUR package is preferred on Arch because it integrates
with @command{pacman} for upgrades, handles the service unit correctly,
and does not require running an untrusted shell script as root.

@subsection Starting Ollama

After installation, start the server:

@example
# One-off (for testing):
ollama serve

# Permanent (recommended):
sudo systemctl enable --now ollama
@end example

Verify it is running:

@example
curl http://localhost:11434/api/tags
@end example

You should see a JSON response.  If you get @samp{Connection refused},
the server is not running --- start it with one of the methods above.

For full model management instructions (pulling, storing, transferring
models) see @ref{Model Management}.


@node Cloning Codebud
@section Cloning Codebud
@cindex cloning, repository

@example
git clone https://github.com/mkhellat/codebud.git
cd codebud
@end example

The repository layout:

@example
agent/          Core agent (planner, executor, safety, tools, memory)
config/         Safety policy JSON files
data/           Embedding index and memory snapshots
docs/           This manual (GNU Texinfo)
openclaw/       OpenClaw SKILL.md (browser UI integration)
Makefile        build targets including install-skill
tests/          Pytest test suite
run_agent.py    CLI entry point (also exposed as the codebud binary)
@end example


@node Python Environment
@section Python Environment
@cindex virtual environment
@cindex pip install

Create and activate a virtual environment:

@example
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
@end example

Your shell prompt will show @samp{(.venv)} when the environment is
active.  Install Codebud in editable mode together with dev dependencies:

@example
pip install -e ".[dev]"
@end example

This installs:
@itemize
@item @code{openai}, @code{requests}, @code{tiktoken} --- runtime deps
@item @code{pytest}, @code{ruff} --- dev deps
@item the @command{codebud} CLI entry point (maps to @code{run_agent:main})
@end itemize

To deactivate the environment later:

@example
deactivate
@end example

To reactivate in a new shell:

@example
source .venv/bin/activate
@end example


@node Build System
@section Build System
@cindex Makefile
@cindex build system
@cindex GNU make

Codebud ships a GNU-standard @file{Makefile} that covers the complete
developer lifecycle.  Every operation you need --- setting up the
environment, running tests, building docs, installing the tool, and
cleaning up --- is a @command{make} target.

Run @command{make help} (the default target) to see all available targets
and the current values of configurable variables:

@example
make help
@end example

@subsection Developer workflow (first-time setup)

@example
git clone https://github.com/mkhellat/codebud.git
cd codebud
make install-dev          @r{# create .venv/ and install all dependencies}
make test                 @r{# run the full test suite}
make lint                 @r{# check code style}
make html                 @r{# build the HTML manual}
@end example

@subsection Target reference

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .70
@headitem Target @tab Effect
@item @code{venv} @tab Create the virtual environment (@file{.venv/})
@item @code{install} @tab Install codebud in editable mode (production deps only)
@item @code{install-dev} @tab Install with all development dependencies
@item @code{install-skill} @tab Register the OpenClaw skill; link @command{codebud} binary to @file{BINDIR}
@item @code{uninstall} @tab Remove the binary link; @command{pip uninstall} the package
@item @code{uninstall-skill} @tab Remove the OpenClaw skill registration and binary link
@item @code{check} / @code{test} @tab Run the full test suite with @command{pytest}
@item @code{coverage} @tab Run tests with branch coverage; write @file{htmlcov/index.html}
@item @code{lint} @tab Check code style with @command{ruff check}
@item @code{format} @tab Auto-format and auto-fix code with @command{ruff}
@item @code{docs} @tab Build HTML, PDF, and GNU info documentation
@item @code{html} @tab Build HTML documentation only
@item @code{pdf} @tab Build PDF documentation only
@item @code{info} @tab Build GNU info documentation only
@item @code{docs-clean} @tab Remove documentation build artefacts
@item @code{dist} @tab Build source archive (@file{.tar.gz}) and wheel (@file{.whl})
@item @code{clean} @tab Remove build artefacts and caches (keep @file{.venv/})
@item @code{distclean} @tab Remove everything not in version control (including @file{.venv/})
@end multitable

@subsection Configurable variables

Override any variable on the command line:

@example
make install-skill PREFIX=/usr/local   @r{# install to /usr/local/bin}
make test PYTHON_INTERP=python3.11     @r{# use a specific interpreter}
@end example

@table @env
@item PREFIX
Installation prefix.  Default: @file{~/.local}.
@item BINDIR
Binary installation directory.  Default: @file{$(PREFIX)/bin}.
@item PYTHON_INTERP
The @command{python3} interpreter used to create the virtual environment.
Default: @command{python3}.
@end table

@subsection Stamp files

The Makefile uses @dfn{stamp files} (@file{.venv/.stamp-venv} and
@file{.venv/.stamp-dev}) to track whether the virtual environment and its
dependencies are up to date.  When @file{pyproject.toml} changes, make
automatically re-runs @command{pip install} on the next @command{make test}
or @command{make lint} call --- you never need to remember to reinstall
manually.


@node Verifying the Install
@section Verifying the Install
@cindex verification

@subsection Run the test suite

@example
pytest -q
@end example

All tests should pass.  No Ollama connection is needed for the tests.

@subsection Check the environment

Run the built-in health checker first.  It verifies Ollama is running,
the model is pulled, and every config file parses cleanly:

@example
codebud doctor
@end example

Each check prints @samp{[PASS]} or @samp{[FAIL]} with a one-line fix command.
Fix any failures before continuing.

@subsection Smoke-test the agent

Pull the recommended model if you have not already (@pxref{Pulling a Model}),
then:

@example
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "list files in the current directory"
@end example

You will see a live spinner while the model processes the prompt, then a
numbered plan summary, then the output of each step.  On a CPU-only laptop,
the planning stage takes 4--6 minutes for the 3B model --- the spinner
keeps moving the whole time so you know it is not frozen
(@pxref{Progress Output}).

@subsection Register the OpenClaw skill (optional)

If you have the OpenClaw gateway installed and want to use Codebud from
the browser UI:

@example
make install-skill
openclaw skills list   @r{# should show codebud as ready}
@end example

@subsection Troubleshooting

If @command{codebud doctor} reports failures or the agent returns a
@code{plan_error}, see @ref{Troubleshooting} for common causes and fixes.
