@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@cindex overview

Codebud is a local, CPU-friendly coding agent.  You describe a task in
plain English; Codebud asks a locally-running language model to produce a
step-by-step plan, validates it against a safety policy, executes each step
using built-in tools (file I/O, shell commands, unified-diff patching,
web search, embeddings), and records what happened in a persistent memory
timeline.  No data leaves your machine.

@menu
* What Codebud Does::           The agent loop in one paragraph.
* Design Goals::                Why it was built this way.
* What Codebud Does Not Do::    Honest limitations.
* Who This Manual Is For::      Audience and assumed knowledge.
* How to Read This Manual::     Chapter-by-chapter guide.
@end menu


@node What Codebud Does
@section What Codebud Does
@cindex agent loop, summary

A single invocation of @command{codebud run "your request"} goes through
four stages:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Plan.}  The LLM planner reads your request and the catalogue of
available tools.  It returns a JSON array of steps, each containing a tool
name, a human-readable description, and a dictionary of arguments.

@item
@strong{Validate.}  The safety engine inspects every step before anything
executes.  Steps that would run disallowed shell commands are rejected
immediately.

@item
@strong{Execute.}  The executor walks the validated step list in order.
Each step calls one tool; the tool returns structured output
(@code{stdout}, @code{stderr}, @code{returncode}).  Execution stops on the
first non-zero exit code.

@item
@strong{Remember.}  Every completed step is appended to an on-disk memory
timeline (@file{data/memory/entries.json}) so that a future session can
inspect what happened.
@end enumerate

The @command{chat} subcommand repeats this cycle across multiple turns
using a single persistent @code{AgentCore} instance, giving the planner
access to everything that happened earlier in the session.


@node Design Goals
@section Design Goals
@cindex design goals
@cindex privacy
@cindex offline

Codebud was built around three constraints:

@table @strong
@item Privacy by default
All inference happens through Ollama on your own hardware.  No prompt,
file name, or command output ever reaches an external server.  An internet
connection is only needed when you explicitly enable the DuckDuckGo web
search tool (@env{WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED=1}).

@item CPU-first
The recommended model (@code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M}) runs on a
2018 laptop CPU with 8@tie{}GB RAM.  The streaming LLM interface and live
progress indicator make the 4--6 minute planning phase bearable
(@pxref{Progress Output}).

@item Explainability
The agent never executes without a visible plan.  The @command{plan}
subcommand lets you inspect what the LLM intends to do before committing.
The safety policy is a plain JSON file you can read and edit.  Memory is a
plain JSON file you can inspect at any time.
@end table


@node What Codebud Does Not Do
@section What Codebud Does Not Do

Codebud is designed for coding and file-management tasks on your local
machine.  It is not a general-purpose assistant.

@itemize
@item
It does not browse the web unless @env{WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED=1} is set.
@item
It does not have persistent knowledge between sessions --- only the memory
timeline from previous runs is available.
@item
It does not self-modify or update its own planner prompt automatically.
@item
It does not run GUI applications, manage databases, or control system
services.  Those commands are blocked by the safety policy by default.
@item
Sandboxing is lightweight (see @ref{Safety and Sandbox}).  Do not run
Codebud with elevated privileges or point it at sensitive files.
@end itemize


@node Who This Manual Is For
@section Who This Manual Is For
@cindex audience

This manual is written for developers who want to:

@itemize
@item
Run Codebud on their own machine for everyday coding tasks.
@item
Understand the architecture well enough to add new tools or tune the
planner prompt.
@item
Integrate Codebud into the OpenClaw browser UI.
@end itemize

@noindent
Assumed knowledge: comfort with a Linux terminal, Python virtual
environments, and the basics of JSON.  No machine-learning background is
required.


@node How to Read This Manual
@section How to Read This Manual
@cindex manual structure

@table @strong
@item First-time setup
@ref{Installation} @arrow{} @ref{Model Management} @arrow{} @ref{Usage}.
Run @command{codebud doctor} whenever something is not working.

@item Understanding the system
@ref{Architecture} explains the component layout.
@ref{Tools Reference} documents each tool's contract.

@item Changing behaviour
@ref{Configuration} lists all environment variables.
@ref{Safety and Sandbox} explains how to edit the policy files.

@item Contributing
@ref{Development} covers the test suite, tool-addition checklist, and
prompt-tuning tips.

@item Looking up a term
@ref{Glossary}.
@end table
