@node LLM Execution Lifecycle
@chapter LLM Execution Lifecycle
@cindex LLM execution lifecycle
@cindex model execution
@cindex inference
@cindex cold-load
@cindex prefill
@cindex generation phase

This chapter explains exactly what happens inside Ollama from the moment
you press Enter to the moment characters appear on your screen.  It covers
every phase of a language model call --- loading, tokenizing, prefilling,
generating, streaming, idling, and unloading --- then walks the same example
prompt through both a non-thinking model and a thinking model so you can see
how differently they behave.

No machine-learning background is assumed.  Each concept is introduced from
first principles, with code snippets that show how Ollama and the model
libraries implement it.

@menu
* The Full Picture::                All six phases at a glance.
* What Lives on Disk::              GGUF files, weights, and the tokenizer.
* Phase 0 Cold-Load::               Moving model weights from disk into RAM.
* Phase 1 Tokenization::            Turning text into numbers the model understands.
* Phase 2 Prefill::                 The model reads your entire prompt at once.
* Phase 3 Generation::              One token at a time, every time.
* Phase 4 Streaming::               Tokens appear as they are born.
* Phase 5 Idle and Keep-Alive::     Staying ready between requests.
* Phase 6 Unload::                  Returning RAM to the operating system.
* Worked Example Non-Thinking::     Full walkthrough with qwen2.5-coder:3b.
* Thinking Models::                 What chain-of-thought reasoning really is.
* Worked Example Thinking::         Full walkthrough with qwen3.5:0.8b.
* Side-by-Side Comparison::         What you actually see in your terminal.
* Quantization::                    Squeezing a 7B model into 4.7 GB.
* Codebud Lifecycle Implementation::  How all of this maps onto Codebud's code.
* Quick Reference Lifecycle::         Phase summary table and model selection guide.
* References and Further Reading::    Primary sources for all claims in this chapter.
@end menu


@node The Full Picture
@section The Full Picture
@cindex lifecycle, overview

Every language model call passes through the same six phases.  The diagram
below labels each phase and shows the dominant bottleneck at that point:

@example
 ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
 │  OLLAMA EXECUTION LIFECYCLE                                      │
 │                                                                  │
 │  [DISK]  ──(0)──>  [RAM]  ──(1)──>  [TOKENS]  ──(2)──>  [KV]  │
 │  weights           model             int IDs             cache  │
 │  (GGUF file)       loaded            e.g. 1196            built  │
 │                    cold-load         tokenize             prefill│
 │                    bottleneck:       bottleneck:          bottleneck:
 │                    disk I/O          negligible           compute│
 │                                                                  │
 │  [KV]  ──(3)──>  [TOKEN]  ──(4)──>  [TEXT]  ──(5/6)──>  [RAM] │
 │  cache            new ID             decoded              idle / │
 │  +attn            repeat             detokenize           unload │
 │  generation       until EOS          bottleneck:          keep   │
 │  bottleneck:      bottleneck:        negligible           alive  │
 │  memory BW        memory BW                               timer  │
 └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
@end example

@noindent
The phases are:

@table @strong
@item 0 --- Cold-load
Model weight file is read from disk and mapped into RAM.  Happens only
once per session (or after a keep_alive timeout).

@item 1 --- Tokenization
Your text prompt is converted into a sequence of integer IDs.  Fast (<<1 s).

@item 2 --- Prefill
The model processes all prompt tokens in a single parallel forward pass.
This builds the @dfn{KV cache} and produces the first output token.  On
CPU-only hardware this is the slowest phase.

@item 3 --- Generation (autoregressive decode)
The model generates one new token at a time, consulting the growing KV cache
at each step.  Repeats until an end-of-sequence token appears.

@item 4 --- Streaming
Each generated token is decoded back to text and sent to the caller
immediately, so text appears incrementally.

@item 5/6 --- Idle / Unload
After the response is complete, the model stays in RAM for the
@code{keep_alive} window (default 5 minutes).  After idle timeout, weights
are evicted from RAM.  The next request triggers a cold-load again.
@end table


@node What Lives on Disk
@section What Lives on Disk
@cindex GGUF file format
@cindex model weights
@cindex tokenizer vocabulary

Before understanding how a model runs, it helps to know what is in the file
Ollama stores on disk.

When you run @command{ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M}, Ollama
downloads one or more files in @dfn{GGUF} format (GPT-Generated Unified
Format, developed by the llama.cpp project).  Each GGUF file is a
self-contained binary that bundles together:

@table @strong
@item Weight tensors
The billions of floating-point numbers that make up the model.  For
@code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} these have been quantized to
approximately 4.5 bits per weight, yielding a file of about 1.9 GB (down
from 6 GB at full FP16 precision).

@item Tokenizer vocabulary
A list of 151,646 tokens (subword pieces) and their integer IDs.  This is
the dictionary the model uses to convert text to numbers and back.

@item Tokenizer merge rules
The BPE merge table: the sequence of pair-merges learned during training.
These rules determine how a word like @samp{directory} is split into subword
tokens.

@item Model hyperparameters
Architecture constants: number of layers, number of attention heads, hidden
dimension size, context window, etc.  These are read once at load time.

@item Special token IDs
The integer IDs for tokens with special meaning: end-of-sequence
(@code{<|im_end|>}, ID 151645), beginning-of-conversation
(@code{<|im_start|>}), fill-in-the-middle markers, etc.
@end table

@noindent
Everything Ollama needs to run inference is in this single file.  There are
no external lookup tables, no cloud calls, no additional downloads once the
model is pulled.

Ollama stores GGUF files under @file{~/.ollama/models/blobs/}, named by
their SHA-256 hash.  A manifest file under
@file{~/.ollama/models/manifests/} maps a human-readable name like
@samp{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} to the corresponding blob hash.


@node Phase 0 Cold-Load
@section Phase 0: Cold-Load
@cindex cold-load
@cindex model loading
@cindex memory-mapped I/O
@cindex mmap

A @dfn{cold-load} happens when a request arrives for a model that is not
currently in RAM.  Ollama must read the GGUF file from disk before any
inference can begin.

@subsection What happens inside Ollama

Ollama spawns a dedicated runner subprocess for each loaded model (using
llama.cpp via CGo bindings).  The sequence is:

@enumerate
@item
Ollama's scheduler checks its @samp{loaded} map.  The model is absent.

@item
The scheduler calls @code{processPending()}, which validates that the number
of currently loaded models is below @env{OLLAMA_MAX_RUNNERS} (default: 1 on
machines with less than ~6 GB available RAM, otherwise as many as fit).

@item
If at capacity, the least-recently-used model is evicted first
(@code{findRunnerToUnload()}).

@item
Ollama enumerates available GPUs, estimates memory requirements, and spawns
a new @code{LlamaServer} subprocess on a dynamically assigned TCP port.

@item
The subprocess opens the GGUF file with @code{mmap()} (memory-mapped I/O).
The OS maps the file into the process's virtual address space.  Actual
physical RAM pages are populated on first access (demand paging).

@item
As the runner initializes, it reads the model architecture from the GGUF
header and allocates GPU/CPU buffers for the weight tensors.  On a CPU-only
machine this is pure RAM allocation.

@item
The runner signals ready; Ollama's scheduler marks the model as loaded and
forwards the pending request.
@end enumerate

@subsection How long does cold-load take?

Cold-load time depends almost entirely on storage speed and model size.
Typical numbers on consumer hardware:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .15 .15 .35
@headitem Scenario @tab Model @tab File size @tab Cold-load time
@item SSD, CPU-only (i7-8550U) @tab 3B Q4_K_M @tab 1.9 GB @tab 10--30 s
@item SSD, CPU-only (i7-8550U) @tab 7B Q4_K_M @tab 4.7 GB @tab 60--120 s
@item HDD, CPU-only @tab 3B Q4_K_M @tab 1.9 GB @tab 60--120 s
@item SSD, NVIDIA GPU (8 GB) @tab 7B Q4_K_M @tab 4.7 GB @tab 5--15 s
@end multitable

@noindent
@strong{The practical implication:} the first request after starting Ollama
(or after the keep_alive timer expires) will appear to hang.  The model is
loading.  Every subsequent request in the same session skips this phase
entirely.

@subsection How Codebud avoids cold-load delay

Codebud fires a tiny warm-up request in a background thread as soon as
@code{AgentCore} is constructed, before the user types anything:

@example
# agent/llm_stub.py
def prewarm_model() -> None:
    model = os.environ.get("OLLAMA_MODEL")
    if not model or not _ollama_available():
        return

    def _warm() -> None:
        requests.post(
            f"@{_OLLAMA_BASE@}/api/generate",
            json=@{"model": model, "prompt": "hi",
                  "stream": False, "options": @{"num_predict": 2@}@},
            timeout=(10, 120),
        )

    threading.Thread(target=_warm, daemon=True,
                     name="codebud-prewarm").start()
@end example

@noindent
By the time the user finishes typing their first request and presses Enter,
the model is already resident in RAM.


@node Phase 1 Tokenization
@section Phase 1: Tokenization
@cindex tokenization
@cindex BPE (Byte Pair Encoding)
@cindex token IDs
@cindex vocabulary

The model cannot process text directly.  Everything it does is arithmetic on
integers.  @dfn{Tokenization} is the translation step: it converts your
natural-language prompt into a sequence of integers, and converts the model's
integer outputs back into readable text.

@subsection What is a token?

A @dfn{token} is a piece of text --- somewhere between a single character and
a whole word --- that exists as an entry in the model's fixed vocabulary.
Qwen2.5-Coder has a vocabulary of @strong{151,646 tokens}.  Each token has
an integer ID from 0 to 151,645.

Common English words are often a single token.  Uncommon words or
identifiers are split into multiple tokens (subword pieces).

@example
Word            Tokens                  Token IDs
-----------     --------------------    -----------------------
"list"          ["list"]                [1196]
"files"         [" files"]              [4390]
"directory"     [" directory"]          [8263]
"argparse"      [" arg", "parse"]       [1822, 6623]
"qwen2.5"       [" q", "wen", "2.", "5"] [2243, 16794, 17, 20]
@end example

@noindent
Notice the @samp{Ġ} (space character) prefix in the raw tokenizer output ---
Qwen uses byte-level BPE where leading spaces are encoded as part of the
following token rather than as separate tokens.

@subsection How the vocabulary was built: BPE

The vocabulary is built offline during model training using
@dfn{Byte Pair Encoding} (BPE), a compression algorithm adapted for text:

@enumerate
@item
Start with a base vocabulary of all 256 possible bytes.

@item
Scan the training corpus (5.5 trillion tokens of code and text for
Qwen2.5-Coder).  Count every adjacent pair of tokens.

@item
Merge the most frequent pair into a new single token.  Add it to the
vocabulary.

@item
Repeat until the vocabulary reaches the target size (151,646 for
Qwen2.5-Coder).
@end enumerate

@noindent
A simplified illustration:

@example
Corpus contains: "hug"×10, "pug"×5, "pun"×12, "bun"×4
Starting vocab:  ["b", "g", "h", "n", "p", "s", "u"]

Step 1: Most frequent pair = ("u","g")  → merge → "ug"
Step 2: Most frequent pair = ("u","n")  → merge → "un"
Step 3: Most frequent pair = ("h","ug") → merge → "hug"

Final vocab: ["b","g","h","n","p","s","u","ug","un","hug"]
"hugs" now tokenizes as: ["hug", "s"]
@end example

@noindent
The key insight: common sequences become single tokens (cheap to represent);
rare sequences get split into many tokens (expensive to represent).

@subsection Applying the tokenizer at inference time

Tokenization at inference is fast (<<1 s for any practical prompt length).
The Python code using HuggingFace's tokenizer library looks like this:

@example
from transformers import AutoTokenizer

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "Qwen/Qwen2.5-Coder-3B-Instruct"
)
prompt = "list files in the current directory"
ids = tokenizer.encode(prompt)
# ids = [1196, 4390, 304, 279, 1510, 8263]

tokens = tokenizer.tokenize(prompt)
# tokens = ['list', ' files', ' in', ' the', ' current', ' directory']
@end example

@noindent
Inside Ollama this is handled in the runner subprocess using the tokenizer
embedded in the GGUF file --- no Python required.

@subsection Why token count matters

The model counts its context in tokens, not characters or words.  Codebud's
planning prompt (system instructions + user request + examples) is
approximately 500--700 tokens.  The model's maximum context window
(the longest combined prompt + response it can handle without confusion) is
4,096 tokens in Ollama's default configuration for Qwen2.5-Coder, though
the model architecture supports up to 128K tokens.

More tokens = slower prefill.  This is why the planning prompt was trimmed
to reduce cold-start time (@pxref{Phase 2 Prefill}).


@node Phase 2 Prefill
@section Phase 2: Prefill
@cindex prefill
@cindex KV cache
@cindex key-value cache
@cindex Time To First Token (TTFT)
@cindex attention mechanism

@dfn{Prefill} is the phase where the model reads your entire prompt and
builds its internal representation of it.  It happens once per request, and
on CPU-only hardware it is usually the single slowest phase.

@subsection What the model is actually doing

A transformer model is a stack of @dfn{layers} (Qwen2.5-Coder-3B has 36
layers; the 7B has 28 deeper layers).  Each layer performs a
@dfn{self-attention} operation that lets every token in the sequence look at
every other token and update its representation based on relevance.

During prefill, all N prompt tokens are fed into the model @emph{in
parallel} in a single forward pass.  For each token at each layer, the model
computes three vectors:

@table @strong
@item Q (Query)
@emph{``What information am I looking for?''}

@item K (Key)
@emph{``What information do I offer to match against?''}

@item V (Value)
@emph{``What information do I carry to the output?''}
@end table

@noindent
The attention formula is:

@example
              Q · K^T
Attention = softmax(------) · V
              sqrt(d_k)
@end example

@noindent
For N input tokens, this requires computing an N×N matrix --- for every pair
of tokens.  The cost grows with the @emph{square} of sequence length: double
the prompt, roughly quadruple the prefill work.

@subsection The KV cache

The Q, K, and V matrices computed during prefill are expensive to compute
and will be needed again during the generation phase.  Rather than
recomputing them, Ollama caches the K and V matrices --- this is the
@dfn{KV cache}.

@example
Prompt:  [tok_0] [tok_1] [tok_2] ... [tok_N]
             |       |       |           |
             ↓       ↓       ↓           ↓     (prefill: parallel)
           [K_0]  [K_1]  [K_2]  ...  [K_N]    ← stored in KV cache
           [V_0]  [V_1]  [V_2]  ...  [V_N]    ← stored in KV cache
             |
             ↓
          [first output token]   ← produced at end of prefill
@end example

@noindent
Every subsequent generation step adds one new K, V pair to the cache.

@subsection KV cache memory requirements

The KV cache occupies RAM in proportion to the context length, number of
layers, and the precision of the cache entries.  For Qwen2.5-Coder-7B at
FP16 precision, 4 KV heads, 28 layers, head size 128:

@example
Per token = 2 × layers × KV_heads × head_size × bytes_per_value
          = 2 × 28 × 4 × 128 × 2 bytes
          = 57,344 bytes  ≈ 56 KB per token

At 4,096 tokens context: 56 KB × 4,096 ≈ 224 MB
At 128K tokens context:  56 KB × 131,072 ≈ 7 GB  (!)
@end example

@noindent
This is why large context windows require substantial RAM beyond the model
weights themselves.

@subsection Prefill timing

Prefill speed is measured in @dfn{TTFT} --- Time To First Token.  On
CPU-only hardware, prefill is much slower than generation:

@example
Hardware: i7-8550U (CPU-only), Qwen2.5-Coder-3B Q4_K_M

Codebud planning prompt (≈600 tokens):
  Prefill time:    ~230 seconds   (≈0.4 tokens/second processed)
  TTFT:            ~230 seconds   (user waits this long before any output)

Short prompt (10 tokens):
  Prefill time:    ~2--5 seconds
  TTFT:            ~2--5 seconds
@end example

@noindent
The progress indicator in @command{codebud chat} shows ``Thinking... Xs
(prefill)'' precisely during this phase.

@subsection What Ollama reports

When @code{stream: false}, Ollama includes prefill timing in the response:

@example
@{
  "prompt_eval_count": 612,         ← tokens in your prompt
  "prompt_eval_duration": 237000000000, ← nanoseconds (= 237 s)
  "eval_count": 45,                 ← tokens generated
  "eval_duration": 41000000000,     ← nanoseconds (= 41 s)
  "total_duration": 278134000000    ← nanoseconds (= 278 s total)
@}
@end example

@noindent
Tokens per second during prefill = @code{prompt_eval_count /
(prompt_eval_duration / 1e9)} = 612 / 237 ≈ 2.6 t/s.
Tokens per second during generation = @code{eval_count /
(eval_duration / 1e9)} = 45 / 41 ≈ 1.1 t/s.


@node Phase 3 Generation
@section Phase 3: Autoregressive Generation
@cindex autoregressive generation
@cindex token sampling
@cindex temperature
@cindex end-of-sequence token
@cindex EOS token

After prefill, the model has processed your prompt and produced the first
output token.  Now it enters @dfn{autoregressive generation}: producing one
token at a time, each conditioned on all previous tokens.

@subsection Why one token at a time?

Generation is @emph{inherently serial}: to generate token N+1, the model must
know token N, which means tokens must be generated in order.  There is no
shortcut --- this is a fundamental property of the transformer architecture.

Each generation step:

@enumerate
@item
Takes the most recently generated token.

@item
Computes its Q vector and attends over the full KV cache (all previous
prompt + generated tokens).

@item
Produces a probability distribution over all 151,646 vocabulary tokens.

@item
@dfn{Samples} one token from that distribution (or takes the highest
probability token if temperature=0).

@item
Appends the new K and V vectors to the KV cache.

@item
Returns the token ID; the caller decodes it to text.

@item
Repeats from step 1 with the new token --- until the model emits the
end-of-sequence token @code{<|im_end|>} (ID 151645).
@end enumerate

@example
 Generation loop (simplified):

 KV_cache = [prefill KV vectors for all prompt tokens]
 token = first_token_from_prefill

 while token != EOS:
     q = compute_query(token)
     attended = attend(q, KV_cache)   ← reads entire KV cache from RAM
     logits = project_to_vocab(attended)
     token = sample(logits, temperature=0.0)
     kv = compute_kv(token)
     KV_cache.append(kv)
     yield token                       ← sent to streaming caller
@end example

@subsection Why generation is memory-bandwidth-bound

During each generation step, the model must read the @emph{entire} KV cache
from RAM into CPU registers --- once per token, every token.  For a 4,096
token KV cache at 224 MB, that is 224 MB of RAM reads per generated token.
A modern CPU can read RAM at ~40--60 GB/s, meaning each attention step takes
roughly 4--6 ms, or about 170--250 tokens/second at the memory-bandwidth
limit.

In practice, the full transformer computation (not just attention) plus
overhead means CPU generation speed is @strong{5--15 t/s} for the 3B model
and @strong{2--5 t/s} for the 7B --- both limited by how fast the CPU can
move weight and cache data.

@subsection Temperature and sampling

The @dfn{temperature} parameter controls how the model samples from its
output distribution.  Codebud sets @code{temperature: 0} because it needs
deterministic JSON output:

@example
Temperature = 0.0  →  Always pick the highest-probability token.
                       Deterministic; good for structured output (JSON).

Temperature = 0.7  →  Sample proportionally. More creative and varied.
                       Good for prose; bad for plans that must be valid JSON.

Temperature = 2.0  →  Highly random. May produce nonsense.
@end example


@node Phase 4 Streaming
@section Phase 4: Streaming and Detokenization
@cindex streaming
@cindex detokenization
@cindex on_chunk callback
@cindex NDJSON

As each token is generated, Ollama immediately @dfn{detokenizes} it (looks up
its text in the vocabulary) and sends it to the client.  This is why text
appears incrementally rather than all at once.

@subsection Ollama's streaming wire format

Ollama uses newline-delimited JSON (NDJSON) over HTTP with
@code{Transfer-Encoding: chunked}.  Each newline-terminated JSON object
represents one or a few tokens:

@example
@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b","response":"@{","done":false@}
@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b","response":"\"status\"","done":false@}
@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b","response":":","done":false@}
@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b","response":" \"ok\"","done":false@}
...
@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b","response":"","done":true,
  "eval_count":45,"eval_duration":41000000000,...@}
@end example

@noindent
The final object has @code{"done": true} and includes the full timing
statistics.

@subsection How Codebud receives streaming output

In @file{agent/llm_stub.py}, the @code{_call_ollama()} function iterates over
the NDJSON lines and accumulates the response.  An optional @code{on_chunk}
callback is called for each fragment so the CLI can update a live progress
indicator without coupling display logic to the LLM layer:

@example
# agent/llm_stub.py  (simplified)
def _call_ollama(model, prompt, timeout, on_chunk=None):
    r = requests.post(
        f"@{_OLLAMA_BASE@}/api/generate",
        json=@{"model": model, "prompt": prompt,
              "stream": True, "options": @{"temperature": 0@}@},
        stream=True,
        timeout=(10, timeout),
    )
    chunks = []
    for line in r.iter_lines():
        chunk = json.loads(line)
        text = chunk.get("response", "")
        chunks.append(text)
        if on_chunk and text:
            on_chunk(text)    ← CLI spinner sees each fragment here
        if chunk.get("done"):
            break
    return "".join(chunks)
@end example

@noindent
The HTTP read timeout is set to the full @code{timeout} value (600 s by
default) because with streaming, the connection receives a trickle of data
throughout generation --- the read timeout only fires if @emph{no data
arrives for that entire duration}, which would only happen if Ollama crashed.


@node Phase 5 Idle and Keep-Alive
@section Phase 5: Idle and Keep-Alive
@cindex keep_alive
@cindex idle timeout
@cindex model lifecycle, idle

After the response is complete, the model does not immediately vanish from
RAM.  Ollama's @dfn{keep_alive} mechanism keeps it resident so the next
request is fast.

@subsection The keep_alive timer

Every successful request resets a per-model countdown timer.  When the timer
reaches zero and no request is in flight for that model, Ollama evicts it.

The default is @strong{5 minutes}.  Configure it per-request or server-wide:

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .30 .40
@headitem Value @tab Meaning @tab Use case
@item @code{0} @tab Evict immediately @tab Free RAM after each response
@item @code{"5m"} @tab 5 minutes (default) @tab Short interactive sessions
@item @code{"30m"} @tab 30 minutes @tab Longer work sessions
@item @code{-1} @tab Never evict @tab Pin model for extended use
@end multitable

@noindent
Set @code{keep_alive} per-request in the JSON body, or server-wide:

@example
# Per-request (overrides server default):
curl http://localhost:11434/api/generate -d \
  '@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M","prompt":"hi","keep_alive":"30m"@}'

# Server-wide default (add to shell profile or systemd service):
export OLLAMA_KEEP_ALIVE=30m
@end example

@subsection How Codebud uses keep_alive

Codebud's @code{ModelHeartbeat} class sends a small real request every
4 minutes (below the 5-minute default) to keep the model loaded for the
entire session:

@example
# agent/llm_stub.py
class ModelHeartbeat:
    def __init__(self, interval: float = 240.0):  # 4 minutes
        ...

    def _ping(self) -> None:
        requests.post(
            f"@{_OLLAMA_BASE@}/api/generate",
            json=@{"model": model, "prompt": "hi",
                  "stream": False,
                  "options": @{"num_predict": 2@}@},  # tiny real request
            timeout=(5, 60),
        )
@end example

@noindent
A zero-token ping (@code{"num_predict": 0}) would not work here --- Ollama
returns immediately without exercising the model, so it does @emph{not}
count as model usage and does @emph{not} reset the keep_alive timer.  The
ping must produce actual output tokens to keep the model alive.


@node Phase 6 Unload
@section Phase 6: Unload
@cindex unload
@cindex model eviction
@cindex LRU eviction

When the keep_alive timer expires, Ollama terminates the runner subprocess
for that model.  The OS reclaims all RAM that was mapped to the GGUF file.
The next request for that model restarts from Phase 0 (cold-load).

@subsection Forced unload via the API

You can evict a model immediately without waiting for the timer:

@example
# Evict qwen2.5-coder:7b from RAM (model files stay on disk):
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:11434/api/generate \
  -d '@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M","keep_alive":0@}'
@end example

@noindent
Or using the Ollama CLI:

@example
ollama stop qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

@subsection LRU eviction when RAM is full

If you request a model while another is already loaded and there is not
enough RAM for both, Ollama evicts the least-recently-used loaded model first.
This is automatic and transparent.  You can prevent a specific model from
being evicted by setting its @code{keep_alive} to @code{-1}.


@node Worked Example Non-Thinking
@section Worked Example: A Non-Thinking Model End to End
@cindex worked example
@cindex qwen2.5-coder

Let us trace a single real request from start to finish.

@strong{Request:} @samp{list files in the current directory}
@strong{Model:} @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} (warm, already in RAM)
@strong{Hardware:} i7-8550U, 16 GB RAM, CPU-only

@subsection Step 1: You press Enter

@command{codebud run "list files in the current directory"} invokes
@code{AgentCore.handle_user_message()}, which calls
@code{LLMPlanner.generate_plan()}.  The planner builds a structured prompt:

@example
You are a precise coding-agent planner. Your ONLY job is to output a JSON plan.

CRITICAL RULES:
1. Output ONLY valid JSON. No prose, no markdown...
...
USER REQUEST: list files in the current directory
@end example

@noindent
This prompt is approximately 600 tokens.

@subsection Step 2: Tokenization

The 600-word prompt is passed to the Ollama REST API.  Inside the runner,
the embedded tokenizer converts it to 600 integer IDs.  Elapsed time:
@strong{<1 second}.

@example
"list"          → 1196
" files"        → 4390
" in"           → 304
" the"          → 279
" current"      → 1510
" directory"    → 8263
... (×600 total) ...
@end example

@subsection Step 3: Prefill

The runner feeds all 600 token IDs through 36 transformer layers in
parallel.  For each layer, the attention mechanism relates each token to
every other token.  At the end of prefill:

@itemize @bullet
@item The KV cache is populated with 600 × 36 × 4 × 128-element vectors.
@item The model has ``read'' and ``understood'' the entire prompt in context.
@item The first output token is produced: @samp{@{} (ID 90295, opening brace).
@end itemize

@noindent
Elapsed time on i7-8550U: @strong{~230 seconds}.  The progress indicator shows:

@example
| Thinking... 230s (prefill)
@end example

@subsection Step 4: Generation

From the first @samp{@{}, the model generates the JSON plan token by token.
Each step reads the full KV cache, produces one token, appends its K and V to
the cache.

@example
@{  →  "  →  s  →  t  →  a  →  t  →  u  →  s  →  "  →  :  →  " ok" ...
@end example

@noindent
Full output (45 tokens, 41 seconds at 1.1 t/s):

@example
@{"status": "ok", "plan": [@{"id": "step_0",
  "description": "list files",
  "tool": "command",
  "args": @{"cmd": "ls -la"@}@}]@}
@end example

@noindent
The progress indicator updates during generation:

@example
\ Generating... tokens: 23 | 1.1 t/s | 251s elapsed
@end example

@subsection Step 5: End-of-sequence and final timing

The model emits the @code{<|im_end|>} token (ID 151645).  Ollama sends the
final NDJSON object with @code{"done": true} and timing statistics:

@example
prefill: 230s | gen: 41s | total: 271s | tokens: 45 | 1.1 t/s
@end example

@subsection Step 6: JSON parsing and execution

@code{call_llm()} joins all chunks into the full string.  The planner calls
@code{json.loads()}, validates the structure, and returns the plan.
@code{AgentCore} passes it to @code{Executor.execute_plan()}, which runs
@command{ls -la} in the sandbox and prints the result.

@subsection Summary timeline

@example
t=0        User presses Enter
t=0 -- 1s  Tokenization (600 tokens, <1 s)
t=1 -- 231s  Prefill  (600 tokens × 36 layers, ~230 s on i7-8550U)
t=231s     First token "@{" appears; progress switches to token counter
t=231 -- 272s  Generation (45 tokens at 1.1 t/s, ~41 s)
t=272s     Response complete; JSON parsed; plan printed; step executed
@end example


@node Thinking Models
@section Thinking Models: A Different Kind of Generation
@cindex thinking models
@cindex chain-of-thought
@cindex DeepSeek-R1
@cindex Qwen3
@cindex @code{<think>} tokens
@cindex reasoning tokens

@dfn{Thinking models} (also called @dfn{reasoning models}) include
DeepSeek-R1, the Qwen3 family, and OpenAI o1/o3.  They look like ordinary
chat models from the outside but generate a large block of internal reasoning
text before producing their final answer.  This section explains what that
means and why it matters for Codebud.

@subsection Where the thinking comes from

Thinking models are trained using @dfn{reinforcement learning} on problems
that have verifiable correct answers (math competitions, code execution, logic
puzzles).  The training reward is given only for correct final answers, not
for how the model reasoned.  Over many training steps, the model learned that
generating more thorough reasoning --- self-verification, backtracking,
reformulating --- consistently leads to more correct answers.  The RL
training process rewarded @emph{longer, better reasoning chains}.

The result: the model generates a reasoning scratchpad before committing to
any answer.

@subsection The @code{<think>} token block

Thinking models use special delimiter tokens to separate reasoning from
the final answer:

@example
User:  "say hello in exactly 5 words"

Model output (streaming, token by token):
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  <think>                                                │
│  The user wants exactly five words. Let me count what   │
│  "hello" means as a greeting. I need five distinct      │
│  words. "Hello there, how are you?" — that's five words. │
│  But is "hello" its own word? Yes. Let me reconsider.   │
│  "Hello, nice to meet you!" — let me count: Hello(1),   │
│  nice(2), to(3), meet(4), you(5). Yes, that works.      │
│  ...several hundred more tokens of deliberation...      │
│  </think>                                               │
│                                                         │
│  Hello, nice to meet you!                               │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
@end example

@noindent
@strong{This is all regular token generation.}  There is no separate
reasoning processor.  The model emits the @code{<think>} token, generates
text tokens for as long as it needs to reason, then emits @code{</think>}
(token ID 151668 in Qwen3), and finally generates the answer.

@subsection Why the reasoning can be enormous

There is no hardcoded reasoning limit built into the model weights.  The
model learned to emit @code{</think>} when it has reasoned ``enough'', but:

@itemize @bullet
@item For hard problems, ``enough'' may mean 2,000--10,000 thinking tokens.
@item DeepSeek-R1 is configured with a maximum generation of
      @strong{32,768 tokens} (combined thinking + answer).
@item Qwen3's maximum thinking budget is @strong{38,912 tokens}.
@item Even simple questions can trigger extended reasoning if the model
      pattern-matches them as ``hard'' (due to surface features like
      unusual phrasing).
@end itemize

@noindent
On CPU-only hardware at 1--5 t/s, 2,000 thinking tokens takes
@strong{7--33 minutes}.  This is not a loading delay --- the model is
actively generating every second.

@subsection Controlling thinking behavior

In HuggingFace format, thinking can be enabled or disabled when building
the chat template:

@example
# Qwen3 with thinking enabled (default for Qwen3 instruct models):
text = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    tokenize=False,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
    enable_thinking=True   ← include reasoning system prompt
)

# Qwen3 with thinking disabled:
text = tokenizer.apply_chat_template(
    messages,
    enable_thinking=False  ← suppress thinking block
)
@end example

@noindent
In Ollama, thinking behavior is controlled by the modelfile system prompt
and is not directly configurable per-request at the API level --- you would
need to create a custom modelfile with @code{PARAMETER think false} (where
supported) or switch to the @samp{:no-think} model variant if one is
available.

@subsection Why thinking models break Codebud's planner

Codebud's planning prompt says:

@example
CRITICAL RULES:
1. Output ONLY valid JSON. No prose, no markdown, no code fences,
   no explanation.
@end example

@noindent
A thinking model ignores this instruction for the @emph{entire duration of
its reasoning chain}.  It emits thousands of tokens of prose before it
eventually produces the JSON the planner needs.  By that time, the Ollama
request has timed out.  Even if it did not time out, the planner calls
@code{json.loads()} on the full output string --- which starts with
@code{<think>...} and is therefore not valid JSON.

Use @strong{instruct models} (model name contains @samp{-instruct}) with
Codebud, not thinking models.


@node Worked Example Thinking
@section Worked Example: A Thinking Model End to End
@cindex worked example, thinking model
@cindex qwen3.5

Same request, different model --- now with @code{qwen3.5:0.8b} (a thinking
model).  We observed this live in production on 2026-05-01.

@strong{Request:} @samp{say hello in exactly 5 words}
@strong{Model:} @code{qwen3.5:0.8b} (warm, already in RAM)
@strong{Hardware:} i7-8550U, 16 GB RAM, CPU-only
@strong{Total elapsed:} @strong{13 minutes and 35 seconds}

@subsection What happened

@table @strong

@item t=0s
You press Enter.  Tokenization takes <1 second.

@item t=0 -- ~3s
Prefill: the 8-token prompt is tiny.  Prefill completes in about 3 seconds.
The first output token emitted is @code{<think>}.

@item t=3s -- ~810s (13+ minutes)
The model generates hundreds of reasoning tokens inside the @code{<think>}
block.  These appear streaming in the terminal --- at ~5 t/s, 800 seconds
means approximately 4,000 thinking tokens.  The user sees the model
thinking out loud, debating how to phrase a 5-word greeting.

@item t=~810s
The model emits @code{</think>} and then generates the actual answer: a
5-word greeting (approximately 6--10 more tokens, taking ~2 more seconds).

@end table

@subsection What you see in the terminal

Running @command{ollama run qwen3.5:0.8b} directly, you observe:

@example
>>> say hello in exactly 5 words
<think>
The user wants me to say hello using exactly five words. Let me count
carefully. "Hello there, nice to meet you" -- Hello(1), there(2),
nice(3), to(4), meet(5), you(6) -- that's six words. Let me try
"Hello, how are you doing?" -- Hello(1), how(2), are(3), you(4),
doing(5) -- five words! But is the comma part of a word? No, commas
are punctuation. So "Hello, how are you doing?" is five words.
Actually, let me reconsider what counts as a word...
[...continues for several minutes...]
</think>

Hello, how are you doing?
@end example

@noindent
@strong{This is not a bug and not a loading delay.}  The model is
performing exactly as designed.  The streaming text you see is the model's
active internal reasoning being generated token by token.

@subsection Why the 0.8B model is slower than the 3B for this task

The 3B instruct model produces a ~45 token JSON plan in ~41 seconds.
The 0.8B @emph{thinking} model took 815 seconds for a 5-word greeting.
The 0.8B model is smaller and would otherwise be @emph{faster} per
token --- but it generated @strong{~50 times more tokens} due to the
reasoning chain.

Model selection for a coding agent is not just about size: it is about
architecture (instruct vs thinking).


@node Side-by-Side Comparison
@section Side-by-Side: What You See in Your Terminal
@cindex comparison, thinking vs non-thinking

The table below shows what a user observes at the terminal for each phase
with each model type.

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .38 .42
@headitem Phase @tab Non-thinking (qwen2.5-coder:3b) @tab Thinking (qwen3.5:0.8b)
@item Prefill @tab Spinner: ``Thinking... 230s (prefill)'' @tab Spinner: ``Thinking... 3s (prefill)''
@item First output @tab JSON @code{@{} token appears @tab @code{<think>} prose token appears
@item Generation @tab Token counter: @code{tokens: 23 | 1.1 t/s} @tab Token counter: @code{tokens: 847 | 4.8 t/s}
@item End of gen. @tab @code{"done":true} after ~45 tokens @tab @code{"done":true} after ~4000 tokens
@item Total time @tab ~271s (4.5 minutes) @tab ~815s (13.5 minutes)
@item Planner result @tab Valid JSON plan @tab JSON parse error (output starts with @code{<think>})
@end multitable

@noindent
A useful rule of thumb: if the model response @emph{begins} with anything
other than @samp{@{}, the planner will fail.  Thinking tokens always appear
before the JSON.


@node Quantization
@section Quantization: Squeezing a 7B Model into 4.7 GB
@cindex quantization
@cindex Q4_K_M
@cindex GGUF quantization
@cindex floating-point precision

@dfn{Quantization} is the process of reducing the precision of a model's
weights from the full-precision format used during training to a smaller
format that fits on consumer hardware.

@subsection Full-precision baseline

During training, model weights are typically stored as @dfn{BF16} or
@dfn{FP16} --- 16-bit floating-point numbers (2 bytes per weight).  A 7B
parameter model requires about @strong{13 GB} in FP16.  A 3B model requires
about @strong{6 GB}.  Neither fits comfortably in 16 GB of RAM alongside the
OS and other applications.

@subsection How Q4_K_M works

@samp{Q4_K_M} is a GGUF quantization format developed for the llama.cpp
project.  Let us break down the name:

@table @strong
@item Q
Quantized format (as opposed to F16 or F32 full precision).

@item 4
Target storage of approximately @strong{4 bits per weight} (compared to 16
bits in FP16).

@item K
Uses the @dfn{k-quant} method: instead of a single global scale factor per
tensor, each @strong{block of 64 weights} gets its own scale factor and
zero-point.  This preserves local structure much better than uniform
quantization.

@item M
Medium precision tier within k-quants.  Attention layers (more sensitive to
precision loss) are stored at slightly higher bit depth; feed-forward layers
(more tolerant) are compressed more aggressively.  The result is an
@emph{average} of approximately @strong{4.5 bits per weight} --- not a pure 4.
@end table

@noindent
Visualized:

@example
FP16 weight:  [1111000011110000]   16 bits, exact
Q4 weight:    [1111]               4 bits, approximate

Per-block (64 weights) in K-quant:
  [scale_factor][zero_point][w0_4bit][w1_4bit]...[w63_4bit]
  The scale and zero-point allow recovery: actual ≈ w_4bit × scale + zero
@end example

@subsection Memory savings and accuracy impact

Measured on llama.cpp benchmarks for a 7B model:

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .15 .20 .50
@headitem Format @tab Bits/wt @tab File size @tab Perplexity increase vs FP16
@item FP16 @tab 16 @tab 13.0 GB @tab baseline (perfect)
@item Q8_0 @tab 8 @tab 6.7 GB @tab +0.0004 (undetectable)
@item Q6_K @tab ~6.5 @tab 5.15 GB @tab +0.004 (negligible)
@item Q5_K_M @tab ~5.5 @tab 4.45 GB @tab +0.014 (tiny)
@item @strong{Q4_K_M} @tab @strong{~4.5} @tab @strong{3.8 GB} @tab @strong{+0.05 (imperceptible)}
@item Q3_K_M @tab ~3.5 @tab 3.3 GB @tab +0.15 (noticeable)
@item Q2_K @tab ~2.5 @tab 2.6 GB @tab +0.6 (significant)
@end multitable

@noindent
@dfn{Perplexity} is a measure of how surprised the model is by text it
should predict well --- lower is better.  The +0.05 increase at Q4_K_M is
so small that no practical code generation task is affected.

@subsection Why quantization also speeds up generation

Generation speed is memory-bandwidth-bound: the CPU must read model weights
from RAM into registers on every forward pass.  Smaller weights mean less
data transferred per step:

@example
FP16, 7B model: 13 GB of weights to stream per forward pass step
Q4_K_M, 7B model: 3.8 GB of weights to stream per forward pass step
                   = 3.4× less data = ~3× faster generation
@end example

@noindent
Practical result on an i7-8550U:

@example
qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M  → ~2--5 t/s   (generation)
qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M  → ~5--15 t/s  (generation)
@end example

@noindent
The 3B model generates faster than the 7B because both the weight reads
@emph{and} the matrix multiplications are cheaper for the smaller model.


@node Codebud Lifecycle Implementation
@section What Codebud Does at Each Phase
@cindex Codebud implementation details
@cindex AgentCore
@cindex llm_stub.py

The table below maps each lifecycle phase to the Codebud code that handles
it.

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .40 .40
@headitem Phase @tab Codebud code @tab Notes
@item Pre-warm @tab @code{agent/llm_stub.py::prewarm_model()} @tab Fires in background thread at AgentCore init
@item Tokenization @tab Ollama internal (GGUF embedded tokenizer) @tab Codebud does not touch this layer
@item Prefill @tab @code{agent/llm_stub.py::_call_ollama()} starts the POST request @tab @code{on_chunk} receives nothing during this phase
@item First token @tab @code{ProgressIndicator.on_chunk()} called for the first time @tab Spinner switches from ``prefill'' to ``generating'' display
@item Generation @tab @code{_call_ollama()} iterates @code{r.iter_lines()} @tab Each line is one NDJSON token fragment
@item Streaming @tab @code{on_chunk} callback passed through AgentCore → LLMPlanner → call_llm @tab Decouples display from LLM layer
@item Done signal @tab @code{chunk.get("done")} breaks the loop @tab Full text assembled from @code{chunks}
@item JSON parse @tab @code{LLMPlanner._attempt()} calls @code{json.loads()} @tab On failure: strips fences, retries with simpler prompt
@item Idle / heartbeat @tab @code{agent/llm_stub.py::ModelHeartbeat._ping()} @tab Sends ``hi'' every 4 min to reset keep_alive timer
@item Unload @tab @code{agent/core.py::AgentCore.close()} stops heartbeat @tab Model unloads naturally after next keep_alive expiry
@end multitable

@noindent
The complete call chain for a single user request:

@example
run_agent.py cmd_run / cmd_chat
  → AgentCore.handle_user_message(message, on_chunk=prog.on_chunk)
      → LLMPlanner.generate_plan(message, on_chunk=on_chunk)
          → LLMPlanner._build_prompt(message)   [tokenization input]
          → call_llm(prompt, on_chunk=on_chunk)
              → _call_ollama(model, prompt, timeout, on_chunk)
                  ← Ollama /api/generate  (streaming NDJSON)
                      Phase 1: tokenize prompt
                      Phase 2: prefill (KV cache built)
                      Phase 3+4: generate + stream tokens
                  → on_chunk(fragment)  [ProgressIndicator.on_chunk]
          → json.loads(full_output)
          → _validate_plan_structure(plan_json)
      → AgentCore._validate_plan(plan_json)
  → Executor.execute_plan(plan)
      → ToolRegistry.get(tool).run(args)
      → MemoryStore.add_snapshot(step, result)
  → print results
@end example


@node Quick Reference Lifecycle
@section Quick Reference
@cindex quick reference, lifecycle

@strong{Phase summary:}

@multitable @columnfractions .05 .20 .20 .20 .35
@headitem # @tab Phase @tab Bottleneck @tab Typical time @tab What to watch
@item 0 @tab Cold-load @tab Disk I/O @tab 10--120 s @tab Only on first request or after idle timeout
@item 1 @tab Tokenize @tab Negligible @tab <1 s @tab --
@item 2 @tab Prefill @tab CPU compute @tab 2--230 s @tab Grows with prompt length (×4 for ×2 tokens)
@item 3 @tab Generate @tab RAM bandwidth @tab 5--600 s @tab Grows with output length; 1--15 t/s on CPU
@item 4 @tab Stream @tab Network (loopback) @tab Negligible @tab Tokens appear live in terminal
@item 5 @tab Idle @tab -- @tab 0--5 min @tab keep_alive timer; reset by each request
@item 6 @tab Unload @tab -- @tab <1 s @tab RAM freed; next request cold-starts
@end multitable

@noindent
@strong{Choosing a model for Codebud:}

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .15 .40
@headitem Criterion @tab Answer @tab Action
@item Does the model name contain @samp{-instruct}? @tab No @tab Do not use with Codebud
@item Is the family @samp{qwen35} or @samp{deepseek-r1}? @tab Yes @tab Do not use; it is a thinking model
@item Warm response to @code{"say hello in 5 words"} > 30 s? @tab Yes @tab Likely a thinking model or too large
@item @code{ollama show <model> | grep family} returns @samp{qwen2}? @tab Yes @tab Safe to use
@end multitable


@node References and Further Reading
@section References and Further Reading
@cindex references
@cindex bibliography

The claims and technical details in this chapter are drawn from the
following primary sources.  Readers wishing to verify a specific claim or
study a topic in more depth should consult these directly.

@subsection Transformer Architecture and Attention

@table @strong

@item Vaswani et al. (2017) --- @emph{Attention Is All You Need}
The original paper introducing the transformer architecture, scaled
dot-product attention, multi-head attention, and the encoder-decoder
structure.  The KV cache and the prefill/decode split originate from this
work.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762}

@item Radford et al. (2019) --- @emph{Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners} (GPT-2)
Introduced byte-level BPE tokenization for large language models and
demonstrated scaling behaviour.
@*@url{https://cdn.openai.com/better-language-models/language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf}

@end table

@subsection Quantization

@table @strong

@item Frantar et al. (2022) --- @emph{GPTQ: Accurate Post-Training Quantization for Generative Pre-trained Transformers}
The quantization method underlying many GGUF 4-bit formats.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.17323}

@item llama.cpp GGUF format specification and k-quant implementation
The definitive reference for GGUF encoding, the Q4_K_M block format,
scale and zero-point layout, and the mixed-precision approach for
attention vs. feed-forward layers.
@*@url{https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/blob/master/docs/gguf.md}
@*@url{https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/pull/1684} (k-quants PR)

@item Dettmers et al. (2022) --- @emph{LLM.int8(): 8-bit Matrix Multiplication for Transformers at Scale}
Foundational work on weight quantization for inference; motivates the
per-block scale approach used in k-quants.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.07339}

@item Comparative quantization benchmarks (perplexity and speed)
@*@url{https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/discussions/406}

@end table

@subsection Tokenization and BPE

@table @strong

@item Sennrich et al. (2016) --- @emph{Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units}
The paper that adapted BPE from text compression to NLP tokenization.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.07909}

@item HuggingFace NLP Course --- @emph{Byte-Pair Encoding tokenization}
The clearest accessible explanation of the BPE training and inference
algorithms, with worked examples.
@*@url{https://huggingface.co/learn/llm-course/chapter6/5}

@item Qwen2.5-Coder Technical Report (2024)
Documents the 151,646-token vocabulary, training corpus (5.5T tokens),
and special token IDs for Qwen2.5-Coder models.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/html/2409.12186v2}

@end table

@subsection Prefill, Decode, and KV Cache

@table @strong

@item Pope et al. (2022) --- @emph{Efficiently Scaling Transformer Inference}
Introduces the prefill/decode split as a distinct systems-level concept and
analyses the memory-bandwidth bottleneck in the decode phase.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05102}

@item NVIDIA Developer Blog --- @emph{Mastering LLM Techniques: Inference Optimization}
Comprehensive treatment of TTFT, ITL, batch sizing, KV cache strategies, and
quantization for GPU inference.
@*@url{https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/mastering-llm-techniques-inference-optimization/}

@item Redis Engineering Blog --- @emph{Prefill vs. Decode: Understanding LLM Inference Performance}
Accessible explanation of the compute-vs-memory-bandwidth distinction between
the two phases, with workload classification.
@*@url{https://redis.io/blog/prefill-vs-decode/}

@item Liu et al. (2023) --- @emph{Ring Attention with Blockwise Transformers}
Analysis of O(N@sup{2}) attention complexity and methods to reduce it.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01889}

@end table

@subsection Thinking / Reasoning Models

@table @strong

@item DeepSeek-AI (2025) --- @emph{DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning}
The paper introducing the RL-based training approach that produces long
chain-of-thought reasoning chains, @code{<think>} token delimiters, and the
32,768-token maximum generation length.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948}
@*Model card: @url{https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1}

@item Qwen Team (2025) --- @emph{Qwen3: Think Deeper, Act Faster}
Documents Qwen3's hybrid thinking/non-thinking architecture, the
@code{/think} and @code{/no_think} control tokens, the 38,912-token thinking
budget, and the @code{</think>} token ID (151668).
@*@url{https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen3/}

@item Wei et al. (2022) --- @emph{Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models}
The foundational paper demonstrating that eliciting step-by-step reasoning
improves model accuracy on complex tasks.
@*@url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903}

@end table

@subsection Ollama Implementation

@table @strong

@item Ollama API Reference
Documents @code{/api/generate} (streaming NDJSON, @code{keep_alive},
@code{prompt_eval_count}, @code{eval_count}), @code{/api/ps}, and explicit
model unloading via @code{keep_alive: 0}.
@*@url{https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/api.md}

@item Ollama scheduler and runner source
The Go source for the scheduler (@file{llm/server.go}),
@code{processPending()}, LRU eviction (@code{findRunnerToUnload()}), and
the multi-process runner architecture.
@*@url{https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/llm/server.go}

@item Ollama FAQ --- @emph{How do I keep a model loaded in memory?}
Official documentation for @code{keep_alive} values and the
@env{OLLAMA_KEEP_ALIVE} environment variable.
@*@url{https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/main/docs/faq.md}

@end table
