@node Model Management
@chapter Model Management
@cindex model management
@cindex Ollama
@cindex LLM models

This chapter explains everything you need to know about managing the language
models that power Codebud: what they are, how to download them, where they
live on disk, how to switch between them, and how to move them to another
machine without re-downloading.

@menu
* What is Ollama::              The local LLM server Codebud talks to.
* Model Hardware Requirements:: RAM, CPU, and disk you will need.
* Choosing a Model::            Which Qwen2.5-Coder variant to use.
* Ollama Server Setup::         Getting the server running.
* Pulling a Model::             Downloading a model for the first time.
* Listing Models::              Seeing what you have installed.
* Where Models Are Stored::     The on-disk layout.
* Custom Storage Location::     Keeping models on a portable drive.
* Selecting a Model in Codebud::  The OLLAMA_MODEL environment variable.
* Switching Models::            Changing models without restarting.
* Transferring Models::         Moving models to another machine.
* Removing Models::             Freeing disk space.
* Runtime Memory Management::   Inspecting and unloading models from RAM.
* Instruct vs Thinking Models:: Choosing the right model architecture.
* Benchmarking Models::         Measuring real speed before committing.
* Model Troubleshooting::       What to do when things go wrong.
* Quick Recipes::               The five commands you will use most.
@end menu


@node What is Ollama
@section What is Ollama
@cindex Ollama, overview

Ollama is a lightweight server that runs large language models (LLMs) locally
on your computer.  Codebud does not call any external API; instead it sends
every prompt to Ollama over a plain HTTP connection on
@code{localhost:11434}.  Your code and your prompts never leave your machine.

Ollama stores model weights in a central directory, serves them through a
small REST API, and handles loading/unloading models from RAM automatically.
You install it once, pull whichever models you want, and point Codebud at
them with a single environment variable.


@node Model Hardware Requirements
@section Hardware Requirements
@cindex system requirements, models
@cindex RAM requirements

The minimum resources depend on the model you choose.  The table below lists
the practical requirements for the models Codebud recommends.

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .15 .20 .30
@headitem Model name @tab Disk @tab RAM needed @tab Gen. speed (i7-8550U)
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:1.5b} @tab ~1 GB @tab ~2 GB @tab ~8 t/s
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} @tab ~1.8 GB @tab ~4 GB @tab ~1.1 t/s
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M} @tab ~4.7 GB @tab ~8 GB @tab <1 t/s
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:14b-instruct-q4_K_M} @tab ~9 GB @tab ~16 GB @tab <0.5 t/s
@end multitable

@noindent
@emph{t/s} = output tokens per second (generation phase).  Prefill (processing
the input prompt) is a separate, slower phase on CPU-only hardware: the 3B
model takes approximately 230 seconds to prefill a 360-token planning prompt
on an i7-8550U, plus ~58 seconds of generation, for a total of ~5 minutes
per agent call.  The 7B model is impractically slow on this hardware (the
same prompt exceeds 5 minutes of prefill alone).

If you have an NVIDIA GPU, Ollama uses it automatically and speeds improve
by 10--50x, making even the 7B model interactive.

@strong{Recommendation for CPU-only laptops (e.g. i7-8550U, 16 GB RAM):}
use @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M}.  It fits in RAM, produces
valid JSON plans reliably, and completes a round-trip in under 6 minutes.
The 1.5B model is faster but less accurate at following structured JSON
instructions; switch to it only if 6 minutes is unacceptably slow.


@node Choosing a Model
@section Choosing a Model
@cindex choosing a model
@cindex Qwen2.5-Coder

All recommended models are from the Qwen2.5-Coder family, which is
specifically trained on source code and follows structured JSON instructions
reliably --- important for Codebud's planner.

@table @strong
@item 1.5B (smallest)
Fast enough for interactive use even on slow hardware.  May struggle with
multi-step plans or complex file edits.  Good for quick experiments.

@item 3B (recommended for CPU laptops)
The best balance of speed and capability on hardware without a dedicated GPU.
Handles Codebud's planning prompt well and usually returns valid JSON on the
first try.

@item 7B (recommended if you have a GPU or a fast desktop CPU)
Noticeably better plan quality and code generation.  Too slow for interactive
use on a 2018 laptop CPU (1--2 tokens/s means 2--5 minutes per prompt).

@item 14B and larger
Requires substantial RAM (16 GB+) and a GPU for practical use.  Not covered
in this manual.
@end table

@noindent
If you are unsure, start with @code{3b-instruct-q4_K_M}.  You can always
pull a larger model later and switch with one environment variable change
(@pxref{Selecting a Model in Codebud}).


@node Ollama Server Setup
@section Installing and Starting Ollama
@cindex installing Ollama
@cindex ollama serve

@subsection Arch Linux

@strong{Option A --- AUR (recommended):}

If you have an AUR helper, install the @code{ollama} package so that
upgrades go through pacman:

@example
yay -S ollama
# or: paru -S ollama
@end example

@strong{Option B --- official installer script:}

If you do not use the AUR, the official script works on any distribution:

@example
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
@end example

This installs the @command{ollama} binary to @file{/usr/local/bin/ollama} and
optionally installs a systemd service unit.  On Arch, the AUR package is
preferred because it integrates with pacman and handles the service unit
without manual steps.

@subsection Starting the server

You must have the Ollama server running before you can pull or use any model.
There are two ways to keep it running:

@table @strong
@item Foreground (for testing)
@example
ollama serve
@end example
Leave this terminal open.  Press @kbd{Ctrl-C} to stop.

@item systemd service (recommended for daily use)
@example
sudo systemctl enable --now ollama
@end example
The service starts automatically on boot.  Check its status with:
@example
systemctl status ollama
@end example
@end table

@subsection Verify the server is running

@example
curl http://localhost:11434/api/tags
@end example

You should receive a JSON response.  If you get @samp{Connection refused},
the server is not running --- start it with one of the methods above.


@node Pulling a Model
@section Pulling a Model
@cindex pulling a model
@cindex ollama pull

Download a model with:

@example
ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

Ollama downloads the model weights in parallel chunks and displays a progress
bar.  The download for the 3B model is approximately 1.8 GB.  It resumes
automatically if interrupted --- you can safely press @kbd{Ctrl-C} and re-run
the same command to continue.

@strong{Important:} you only need to pull a model once.  The weights are
stored permanently on disk (@pxref{Where Models Are Stored}) and reused
across Ollama restarts.


@node Listing Models
@section Listing Models
@cindex listing models
@cindex ollama list

To see every model you have downloaded:

@example
ollama list
@end example

Example output:

@example
NAME                                    ID              SIZE    MODIFIED
qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M       abc123...       1.8 GB  2 minutes ago
qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M       def456...       4.7 GB  1 hour ago
@end example

To inspect details about a specific model:

@example
ollama show qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

You can also query the REST API directly:

@example
curl -s http://localhost:11434/api/tags | python3 -m json.tool
@end example


@node Where Models Are Stored
@section Where Models Are Stored
@cindex model storage location
@cindex ~/.ollama

Ollama stores all model data under:

@example
~/.ollama/models/
@end example

The layout inside is:

@table @file
@item blobs/
The actual weight files.  Each file is named after its SHA-256 hash,
for example @file{sha256-60e05f210007@dots{}}.  A single blob can be shared
by multiple model variants (Ollama deduplicates weights automatically).

@item manifests/
Small JSON files that map a human-readable model name such as
@samp{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} to the blob hashes that make up
that model.
@end table

You never need to edit these files by hand.  Use @command{ollama list},
@command{ollama pull}, and @command{ollama rm} to manage them.

@strong{Disk usage check:}

@example
du -sh ~/.ollama/models/
@end example


@node Custom Storage Location
@section Custom Storage Location
@cindex OLLAMA_MODELS
@cindex portable model storage

By default Ollama writes models to @file{~/.ollama/models/}.  You can
redirect this to any path --- a different disk partition, an external drive,
or a shared network folder --- by setting the @env{OLLAMA_MODELS} environment
variable before starting the server.

@example
export OLLAMA_MODELS=/media/external-drive/ollama-models
ollama serve
@end example

All @command{ollama pull} and @command{ollama list} operations will use that
path.  To make this permanent, add the export to your shell profile
(@file{~/.zshrc} or @file{~/.bashrc}) @emph{and} to the Ollama systemd
service override if you use one:

@example
sudo systemctl edit ollama
@end example

Then add:

@example
[Service]
Environment="OLLAMA_MODELS=/media/external-drive/ollama-models"
@end example

After saving, reload and restart the service:

@example
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl restart ollama
@end example


@node Selecting a Model in Codebud
@section Selecting a Model in Codebud
@cindex OLLAMA_MODEL
@cindex OLLAMA_BASE_URL

Codebud reads two environment variables to find the model:

@table @env
@item OLLAMA_MODEL
The exact model name to use, as it appears in @command{ollama list}.
This variable @strong{must} be set; without it Codebud falls back to
OpenAI or logs a warning and returns no plan.

@item OLLAMA_BASE_URL
The base URL of the Ollama server.  Defaults to
@code{http://localhost:11434}.  Change this only if you are running Ollama
on a different machine or a non-standard port.
@end table

Example --- run Codebud with the 3B model:

@example
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "create a hello.py that prints Hello, world"
@end example

Or inline for a one-off run:

@example
OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M codebud run "..."
@end example

Use @command{codebud models} to see all pulled models with the active one
highlighted (@pxref{The models Subcommand}).


@node Switching Models
@section Switching Models
@cindex switching models

To switch from one model to another, simply change @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} and
run Codebud again.  No restart of the Ollama server is needed; it loads and
unloads models from RAM on demand.

@example
# Switch from 3B to 7B
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "refactor agent/planner.py to add retry logic"
@end example

If the new model has not been pulled yet, pull it first
(@pxref{Pulling a Model}).


@node Transferring Models
@section Transferring Models
@cindex transferring models
@cindex copying models offline

Because model weights can be several gigabytes and bandwidth may be expensive,
you can copy already-downloaded models to another machine instead of pulling
them again.

@subsection Method 1 --- tar archive (offline copy)

On the source machine:

@example
tar -czf ollama-models.tar.gz ~/.ollama/models/
@end example

Transfer @file{ollama-models.tar.gz} by USB drive, local network, or any
other means.  On the target machine (with Ollama installed):

@example
mkdir -p ~/.ollama
tar -xzf ollama-models.tar.gz -C ~/
@end example

After extraction, @command{ollama list} on the target machine will show the
models immediately, as if they had been pulled normally.

@subsection Method 2 --- shared or portable drive (zero-copy)

If both machines can access the same physical drive or network share,
point @env{OLLAMA_MODELS} at the shared path on each machine:

@example
export OLLAMA_MODELS=/media/shared-drive/ollama-models
ollama serve
@end example

No copying is needed.  Both machines read the same blob files.

@strong{Note:} do not run two Ollama servers writing to the same
@env{OLLAMA_MODELS} path at the same time; concurrent writes can corrupt
the manifest files.


@node Removing Models
@section Removing Models
@cindex removing models
@cindex ollama rm
@cindex freeing disk space

To delete a model and reclaim disk space:

@example
ollama rm qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

This removes the manifest and any blobs that are not shared with another
installed model.  Verify with @command{ollama list} and @command{du -sh
~/.ollama/models/}.

@strong{Warning:} this is permanent.  You will need to re-download
(@command{ollama pull}) if you want the model back.


@node Runtime Memory Management
@section Runtime Memory Management
@cindex model unloading
@cindex keep_alive
@cindex RAM, freeing
@cindex /api/ps

Ollama loads a model into RAM on the first request and keeps it there for a
@dfn{keep_alive} window (default: 5 minutes of idle time).  A second model
requested while the first is still loaded will be loaded alongside it,
consuming RAM for both.  On machines with limited memory this matters: you
can inspect what is currently loaded and evict models you are not using
without restarting Ollama.

@subsection Inspecting currently loaded models

The @samp{/api/ps} endpoint lists every model currently resident in RAM,
along with its size and expiry time:

@example
curl -s http://localhost:11434/api/ps | python3 -m json.tool
@end example

Example output (two models loaded simultaneously):

@example
@{
    "models": [
        @{
            "name": "qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M",
            "size": 4605440000,
            "expires_at": "2026-05-01T09:45:28...",
            "details": @{ "parameter_size": "7.6B", "quantization_level": "Q4_K_M" @}
        @},
        @{
            "name": "qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M",
            "size": 2074941440,
            "expires_at": "2026-05-01T09:44:51..."
        @}
    ]
@}
@end example

For a compact one-liner showing just names and sizes in GB:

@example
curl -s http://localhost:11434/api/ps | \
  python3 -c "
import json, sys
for m in json.load(sys.stdin)['models']:
    print(m['name'], f\"@{m['size']/1e9:.1f@} GB\")
"
@end example

@subsection Force-unloading a model from RAM

To evict a specific model immediately without stopping Ollama, send a
generate request with @samp{keep_alive} set to @code{0}:

@example
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:11434/api/generate \
  -d '@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M","keep_alive":0@}'
@end example

Ollama responds with @samp{"done_reason":"unload"} and the model's weights
are freed from RAM immediately.  The model is @emph{not deleted} from disk
--- it can be reloaded at any time by sending a normal request.

To unload several models at once, repeat the command for each:

@example
for model in qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M qwen3.5:0.8b; do
  curl -s -X POST http://localhost:11434/api/generate \
    -d "@{\"model\":\"$model\",\"keep_alive\":0@}" | \
    python3 -c "import json,sys; r=json.load(sys.stdin); \
      print(r['model'], '->', r.get('done_reason','?'))"
done
@end example

@subsection The keep_alive lifecycle

Every successful generate request resets the keep_alive timer for that model.
Codebud's heartbeat thread exploits this: it sends a small real request every
4 minutes so the model is never idle long enough to be evicted.

@table @strong
@item keep_alive: 0
Evict the model from RAM immediately after this request.
@item keep_alive: -1
Keep the model in RAM indefinitely (until Ollama is restarted or you
send @samp{keep_alive: 0}).
@item keep_alive: "30m" (string)
Keep the model for 30 minutes of idle time.
@end table

@strong{Tip:} run @command{codebud doctor} after freeing RAM to confirm that
the model Codebud is configured to use is still reachable.


@node Instruct vs Thinking Models
@section Instruct vs Thinking Models
@cindex thinking models
@cindex chain-of-thought
@cindex qwen3.5

Not all models behave the same way.  Choosing the wrong architecture for
Codebud's use case can make the agent appear completely broken.

@table @strong

@item Instruct models (recommended for Codebud)
Examples: @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M},
@code{qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M}.

These models are fine-tuned to follow instructions directly.  Given
@samp{Output JSON only}, they do.  Response time is dominated by the
@dfn{prefill} phase (processing the prompt) and the @dfn{generation} phase
(producing output tokens).  On an i7-8550U: 3B produces a short plan in
under 10 seconds when warm; 7B in under 20 seconds when warm.

@item Thinking models (not suitable for Codebud)
Examples: @code{qwen3.5:0.8b}, @code{deepseek-r1}, models with @samp{:think}
suffix.

These models emit a @code{<think>@dots{}</think>} reasoning block before the
final answer.  The internal scratchpad can be hundreds or thousands of tokens
long --- even for trivial prompts.  @code{qwen3.5:0.8b} (873M parameters,
1 GB on disk) took @strong{13 minutes and 35 seconds} to say hello in 5 words
because it thought about it for the entire duration.  The visible streaming
text you see in @command{ollama run} is this reasoning chain, @emph{not} the
cold-load delay --- the model was already warm.

Codebud's planner prompt demands @samp{Output ONLY valid JSON}.  A thinking
model ignores this constraint for the first several minutes of thinking tokens
before finally emitting JSON, causing the HTTP timeout to fire first.  Do not
use thinking models with Codebud.
@end table

@subsection Quick identification

@example
ollama show <model-name> | grep -i family
@end example

Models with family @samp{qwen35} or a @samp{think} variant in their name are
thinking models.  Models with family @samp{qwen2} are instruct models.


@node Benchmarking Models
@section Benchmarking Models
@cindex benchmarking
@cindex llm CLI
@cindex simonw/llm

Before committing to a model, measure its warm response time with a short
prompt.  The @command{llm} CLI tool (by Simon Willison) wraps the Ollama API
and makes timing straightforward:

@example
# Install the Ollama plugin for llm
# (requires llm installed in its own venv; see project Downloads directory)
llm install llm-ollama
@end example

Time a warm response (model already loaded):

@example
time llm -m qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M \
  "say hello in exactly 5 words"
@end example

Observed results on an i7-8550U (CPU-only, 16 GB RAM):

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .20 .35
@headitem Model @tab Warm time @tab Notes
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M} @tab ~10 s @tab Recommended; direct answer
@item @code{qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M} @tab ~17 s @tab Better reasoning; still usable
@item @code{qwen3.5:0.8b} @tab ~8 min @tab Thinking model; unsuitable for Codebud
@end multitable

@noindent
The first request after a cold start (model not in RAM) adds 1--5 minutes
of loading time on top of these figures.  Subsequent requests within the
keep_alive window use the times in the table above.

@strong{Rule of thumb:} if @command{time llm -m <model> "hello"} exceeds
30 seconds on a warm model, that model is either a thinking model or too
large for your hardware.


@node Model Troubleshooting
@section Troubleshooting
@cindex troubleshooting, models

@table @strong

@item @samp{could not connect to a running Ollama instance}
The Ollama server is not running.  Start it with @command{ollama serve} or
@command{sudo systemctl start ollama}.

@item @samp{model not found}
The model name passed in @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} does not match any installed
model.  Run @command{ollama list} to see what is available, and
@command{ollama pull <name>} to download the missing model.

@item Response times are very slow (minutes per prompt)
You are likely running a model that is too large for your CPU.  Switch to a
smaller variant (@pxref{Choosing a Model}).  Also check that Ollama is not
swapping to disk:

@example
free -h
cat /proc/$(pgrep ollama)/status | grep VmRSS
@end example

If @samp{available} RAM is near zero, you need a smaller model.

@item @samp{LLM returned empty output} or request timeout in Codebud
The HTTP request timed out before Ollama finished generating.  This usually
means the model is too slow for the prompt size.  Try a smaller model, or
wait for the model to finish loading into RAM (the first request after a
server restart is always the slowest).

@item Out of memory / Ollama killed by the OOM killer
The model weights do not fit in RAM.  Check @command{ollama list} for the
model size and compare it to @command{free -h}.  Switch to a smaller model
or close other applications to free RAM.

@end table


@node Quick Recipes
@section Quick Recipes
@cindex quick recipes

The five commands you will type most often:

@table @strong

@item Start the Ollama server
@example
ollama serve
@end example

@item Download the recommended model
@example
ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

@item Run Codebud with that model
@example
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "your task here"
@end example

@item See which models are currently in RAM
@example
curl -s http://localhost:11434/api/ps | python3 -m json.tool
@end example

@item Evict a specific model from RAM (keep files on disk)
@example
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:11434/api/generate \
  -d '@{"model":"qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M","keep_alive":0@}'
@end example

@item Keep only the 3B model in RAM (free everything else)
@example
for model in qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M qwen3.5:0.8b; do
  curl -s -X POST http://localhost:11434/api/generate \
    -d "@{\"model\":\"$model\",\"keep_alive\":0@}" > /dev/null
done
@end example

@item Benchmark warm response time for a model
@example
time llm -m qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M "say hello in 5 words"
@end example

@item Back up all models to a single archive
@example
tar -czf ollama-models.tar.gz ~/.ollama/models/
@end example

@item Restore models on a new machine
@example
tar -xzf ollama-models.tar.gz -C ~/
@end example

@end table
