@node Safety and Sandbox
@chapter Safety and Sandbox
@cindex safety
@cindex sandbox

Codebud applies two independent layers of protection before a shell command
runs.  This chapter explains what each layer does, how they interact, and
how to tune the policy for your workflow.

@menu
* Two-Layer Model::             Why there are two guards, not one.
* The Safety Engine::           JSON policy + per-step validation.
* The Sandbox::                 Subprocess guard + timeout.
* How a Command Gets Through::  The full decision path.
* Editing the Policy Files::    Adding and removing allowed commands.
* What Is Not Protected::       Honest limitations.
@end menu


@node Two-Layer Model
@section Two-Layer Model
@cindex two-layer safety

@example
LLM output
    │
    ▼
SafetyEngine.validate_step()          @r{(layer 1: policy file check)}
    │  reject → plan_error
    ▼
AgentCore._validate_plan()            @r{(same check, defence-in-depth)}
    │  reject → plan_error
    ▼
Executor → tool.run(args)
    │
    ▼  (for command steps only)
Sandbox._is_dangerous()               @r{(layer 2: hard-coded block list)}
    │  block → returncode=1
    ▼
subprocess.run(shlex.split(cmd), timeout=10)
@end example

The two layers are independent.  Layer 1 is policy-driven and editable.
Layer 2 is hard-coded and cannot be overridden from config files.  Both
must pass for a shell command to run.

Non-shell tools (@code{file_write}, @code{file_read}, @code{patch},
@code{web_search}, @code{embed}, @code{search_embeddings}) pass directly
through layer 1 and bypass layer 2 entirely.


@node The Safety Engine
@section The Safety Engine
@cindex SafetyEngine
@cindex validate_step

@code{SafetyEngine.validate_step(step)} is called by @code{LLMPlanner}
during plan validation and again by @code{AgentCore} before execution.
For @code{command} steps it applies one rule:

@quotation
The @code{cmd} value must start with a prefix listed in
@file{harmless_commands.json} or @file{powerful_commands.json}.
@end quotation

Matching is prefix-based: @code{"ls -la"} matches the prefix @code{"ls"};
@code{"rm important.txt"} does not match any default prefix and is
rejected.

When a step fails validation the entire plan is rejected with the error
@code{"LLM returned malformed plan"}.  The agent never executes a partial
plan.

@code{describe_rules()} returns a compact summary of the three policy
lists, which is embedded in the planner prompt so the model can avoid
proposing forbidden commands in the first place.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/safety.py}


@node The Sandbox
@section The Sandbox
@cindex Sandbox._is_dangerous
@cindex hard-blocked commands

The @code{Sandbox} is the last line of defence.  Even if the policy files
were edited to allow a dangerous command, the sandbox checks a small
hard-coded block list first:

@table @code
@item rm -rf /
Deletes the root filesystem.

@item rm -rf *
Deletes everything in the current directory.

@item shutdown
Shuts down the machine.

@item reboot
Reboots the machine.

@item :()@{:|:&@};:
The classic fork bomb.
@end table

Commands matching any of these patterns return @code{returncode=1} and
a @code{stderr} message without touching the filesystem.

@strong{Timeout.}  Every command runs under a 10-second wall-clock timeout
enforced by @code{subprocess.run(timeout=10)}.  A timed-out command
returns @code{returncode=1} with the message
@samp{Command timed out after 10 seconds}.

@strong{No shell expansion.}  The command string is split with
@code{shlex.split()} and passed as a list to @code{subprocess.run()}.
Shell metacharacters (@code{&&}, @code{|}, @code{;}, @code{>}) are treated
as literal argument characters, not operators.  To run a pipeline, use
@code{"sh -c 'cmd1 | cmd2'"}.

@noindent
Source: @file{agent/sandbox.py}


@node How a Command Gets Through
@section How a Command Gets Through

The following table traces the path of a @code{command} step from LLM
output to execution.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .40 .35
@headitem Command @tab Result @tab Reason
@item @code{ls -la} @tab @kbd{executes} @tab matches @code{"ls"} prefix in harmless list
@item @code{pytest -q} @tab @kbd{executes}* @tab matches @code{"python"} prefix --- or add @code{"pytest"} to harmless list
@item @code{cat README.md} @tab @kbd{executes} @tab matches @code{"cat"} prefix
@item @code{cp foo bar} @tab @kbd{executes} @tab matches @code{"cp"} prefix in powerful list
@item @code{rm file.txt} @tab @kbd{rejected} @tab no @code{"rm"} prefix in either list
@item @code{rm -rf /} @tab @kbd{blocked} @tab hard-coded in Sandbox regardless of policy
@item @code{sudo pacman -Syu} @tab @kbd{rejected} @tab no @code{"sudo"} prefix in either list
@item @code{git log} @tab @kbd{rejected}* @tab no @code{"git"} prefix by default --- add it to run git commands
@end multitable

@emph{*} Default lists do not include @code{"pytest"} or @code{"git"}.
Add them to @file{harmless_commands.json} for a developer workflow
(@pxref{Editing the Policy Files}).


@node Editing the Policy Files
@section Editing the Policy Files
@cindex editing policy files

Edit @file{config/harmless_commands.json} and
@file{config/powerful_commands.json} with any text editor.  Changes take
effect the next time @code{AgentCore} is initialised (i.e.@: the next
@command{codebud run} invocation).

@subsection Recommended configuration for Python development

@example
@r{config/harmless_commands.json:}
[
  "echo",
  "cat",
  "head",
  "tail",
  "ls",
  "pwd",
  "whoami",
  "wc",
  "find",
  "diff",
  "python",
  "python3",
  "pytest",
  "ruff",
  "git log",
  "git status",
  "git diff",
  "git show"
]

@r{config/powerful_commands.json:}
[
  "grep",
  "sed",
  "awk",
  "cp",
  "mv",
  "mkdir",
  "touch",
  "pip install",
  "git add",
  "git commit",
  "git checkout"
]
@end example

@subsection Tips

@itemize
@item
Add @code{"git log"} rather than @code{"git"} to avoid inadvertently
permitting @command{git push} or @command{git reset --hard}.

@item
Add @code{"pytest"} to the harmless list so the test suite can be run
without the planner wrapping it in a @code{python -m pytest} call.

@item
After editing, run @command{codebud doctor} to confirm the files parse
correctly.

@item
Entries are checked by prefix.  An entry of @code{"python"} also allows
@code{python3} and @code{python -m pytest} --- they all start with
@code{"python"}.  This is intentional; add more specific prefixes to
tighten the policy if needed.
@end itemize


@node What Is Not Protected
@section What Is Not Protected
@cindex limitations, safety

The safety system is designed to prevent accidental mistakes by a
well-intentioned model, not to defend against an adversarial one.  Be
aware of the following limitations:

@itemize
@item
@strong{No output inspection.}  The sandbox runs commands but does not
inspect what they write to the filesystem.  A @code{file_write} step can
write any content to any writable path without safety checks.

@item
@strong{No network firewall.}  Commands launched via the @code{command}
tool can make network calls.  The sandbox does not restrict outbound
connections.

@item
@strong{No privilege escalation guard.}  @code{"sudo"} is not in the
default policy, but if you add it, any @code{sudo} command the model
proposes will run.

@item
@strong{Prefix matching is coarse.}  An entry of @code{"python"} allows
@code{python -c "__import__('os').system('rm -rf /')"}.  The sandbox
catches @code{"rm -rf /"} as a substring, but other destructive Python
one-liners would not be caught.

@item
@strong{10-second timeout is short.}  Long operations (building a large
project, running a slow test suite) will time out.  Adjust the timeout in
@file{agent/sandbox.py} if needed.
@end itemize

@noindent
@strong{Bottom line:} Codebud is a developer tool, not a security boundary.
Run it in a directory you own, with files you are willing to modify, and
under a user account that does not have elevated privileges.
