@node Tools Reference
@chapter Tools Reference
@cindex tools reference

This chapter documents every built-in tool.  Tools are the only way the
agent can interact with the outside world.  The planner names a tool in
each plan step; the executor calls @code{tool.run(args)} and passes the
result to the memory store.

Every tool follows the same contract:

@example
@r{Input:}  args dict          (keys and types documented per tool)
@r{Output:} @{ "stdout": str, "stderr": str, "returncode": int @}
@end example

A @code{returncode} of @code{0} means success; anything else means failure.
The executor stops and returns a @code{step_error} on the first failure.

@menu
* file_write::          Create or overwrite a file.
* file_read::           Read a file's contents.
* command::             Execute a shell command.
* patch::               Apply a unified diff to a file.
* web_search::          Search the web via DuckDuckGo Lite.
* embed::               Generate an embedding vector.
* search_embeddings::   Find semantically similar stored entries.
@end menu


@node file_write
@section @code{file_write}
@cindex file_write tool

Creates or overwrites a file with the given content.  Parent directories
are created automatically with @code{os.makedirs(exist_ok=True)}.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item path
@emph{Required.}  Path to the file to write (relative to the working
directory or absolute).

@item content
@emph{Required.}  The complete text to write.  The file is written in one
shot; any existing content is replaced entirely.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{ "stdout": "Wrote N bytes to path", "stderr": "", "returncode": 0 @}
@end example

On failure:
@example
@{ "stdout": "", "stderr": "FileWriteTool error: ...", "returncode": 1 @}
@end example

@subsection When to use

Use @code{file_write} when you need to create a new file or replace a
file's entire content.  Prefer @code{patch} when you only want to change
a few lines in an existing file --- @code{file_write} requires the planner
to reproduce the complete file contents, which wastes tokens and risks
losing existing code.

@subsection Example plan step

@example
@{
  "id": "step_0",
  "description": "create hello.py",
  "tool": "file_write",
  "args": @{
    "path": "hello.py",
    "content": "print('Hello, world')\n"
  @}
@}
@end example


@node file_read
@section @code{file_read}
@cindex file_read tool

Reads the content of a named file and returns it in @code{stdout}.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item path
@emph{Required.}  Path to an existing file.  Must be a file, not a
directory.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{ "stdout": "<file contents>", "stderr": "", "returncode": 0 @}
@end example

On failure (file not found, permission denied):
@example
@{ "stdout": "", "stderr": "File not found: path", "returncode": 1 @}
@end example

@subsection When to use

Use @code{file_read} only when you know the exact name of a file you want
to read.  Do @emph{not} use it to list a directory --- the planner
disambiguates this in a critical rule: use @code{command} with
@code{cmd: "ls"} to list directory contents.

@subsection Example plan step

@example
@{
  "id": "step_0",
  "description": "read README.md",
  "tool": "file_read",
  "args": @{ "path": "README.md" @}
@}
@end example


@node command
@section @code{command}
@cindex command tool
@cindex sandbox, command execution

Executes a shell command inside the @code{Sandbox}.  This is the most
general-purpose tool and covers all shell operations that the other
specialised tools do not address: running test suites, querying git,
searching files with @command{grep}, checking running processes, and so on.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item cmd
@emph{Required.}  A shell command string.  The sandbox splits it with
@code{shlex.split()} --- shell metacharacters (@code{&&}, @code{|},
@code{>}) are @emph{not} interpreted.  If you need a pipeline, write the
command as a single string using a real shell: @code{"sh -c 'grep foo bar | wc -l'"}.
@end table

@subsection Returns

@example
@{
  "stdout": "<command stdout>",
  "stderr": "<command stderr>",
  "returncode": <int>
@}
@end example

@subsection Constraints

@itemize
@item
The command must start with a prefix listed in @file{harmless_commands.json}
or @file{powerful_commands.json}.  Commands that do not match any prefix
are rejected by the @code{SafetyEngine} before the step runs.

@item
The @code{Sandbox} hard-blocks @code{rm -rf /}, @code{rm -rf *},
@code{shutdown}, @code{reboot}, and the fork bomb regardless of the policy
files.

@item
Commands time out after 10 seconds.  Long-running commands (compilation,
large test suites) may need to be broken into smaller steps or the timeout
increased by editing @file{agent/sandbox.py}.
@end itemize

@subsection Example plan steps

@example
@r{# List files}
@{ "tool": "command", "args": @{ "cmd": "ls -la" @} @}

@r{# Run the test suite}
@{ "tool": "command", "args": @{ "cmd": "pytest -q" @} @}

@r{# Search for a function name}
@{ "tool": "command", "args": @{ "cmd": "grep -rn 'def run' agent/" @} @}
@end example


@node patch
@section @code{patch}
@cindex patch tool
@cindex unified diff

Applies a unified diff to an existing file.  Use this instead of
@code{file_write} when only a few lines need to change --- the diff is
smaller than the full file, which saves tokens and is less likely to
introduce accidental changes.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item patch
@emph{Required.}  A unified diff string as produced by @command{diff -u}
or @command{git diff}.  Must include @samp{---} and @samp{+++} header
lines that identify the target file.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{ "stdout": "Applied patch to <file>", "stderr": "", "returncode": 0 @}
@end example

On failure:
@example
@{ "stdout": "", "stderr": "PatchTool error: ...", "returncode": 1 @}
@end example

@subsection Example plan step

@example
@{
  "id": "step_0",
  "description": "change greeting to Spanish",
  "tool": "patch",
  "args": @{
    "patch": "--- a/hello.py\n+++ b/hello.py\n@@ -1 +1 @@\n-print('Hello, world')\n+print('Hola, mundo')\n"
  @}
@}
@end example

@subsection Limitations

The built-in patcher handles simple line-level changes.  For complex diffs
(large hunks, binary files, renames), use a @code{command} step to invoke
the system @command{patch} utility instead.


@node web_search
@section @code{web_search}
@cindex web_search tool
@cindex DuckDuckGo

Queries DuckDuckGo Lite and returns up to five results as a JSON array.

@strong{This tool is disabled by default.}  Set @env{WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED=1}
before running Codebud to enable it.  When disabled, the tool's description
in the planner prompt is replaced with a notice so the planner knows not
to use it.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item query
@emph{Required.}  A search query string.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{
  "stdout": "[
    @{\"title\": \"...\", \"url\": \"...\", \"snippet\": \"...\"@},
    ...
  ]",
  "stderr": "",
  "returncode": 0
@}
@end example

On failure or when disabled:
@example
@{ "stdout": "", "stderr": "Web search is disabled...", "returncode": 1 @}
@end example

@subsection Example plan step

@example
@{
  "id": "step_0",
  "description": "search for Python async patterns",
  "tool": "web_search",
  "args": @{ "query": "Python async await best practices 2024" @}
@}
@end example

@subsection Privacy note

Queries are sent to @code{https://lite.duckduckgo.com/lite/} over HTTPS.
This is the only network call Codebud makes that goes outside your machine
(apart from Ollama on a remote host).


@node embed
@section @code{embed}
@cindex embed tool
@cindex embeddings

Generates a floating-point embedding vector for a piece of text using the
Ollama embedding endpoint.  Falls back to a deterministic stub when Ollama
is unreachable (so the tool still works in tests and offline scenarios).

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item text
@emph{Required.}  The text to embed.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{ "stdout": "[0.12, -0.34, ...]", "stderr": "", "returncode": 0 @}
@end example

The @code{stdout} value is a JSON array of floats.

@subsection Environment variables

@table @env
@item EMBED_MODEL
The Ollama model to use for embeddings.  Defaults to @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}.
@item OLLAMA_BASE_URL
The Ollama server.  Defaults to @code{http://localhost:11434}.
@end table

@subsection When to use

Use @code{embed} when you want to store a semantic representation of a
piece of code or text in the embedding index (@pxref{search_embeddings}).
The planner rarely proposes this tool directly; it is more commonly called
programmatically when building an index.


@node search_embeddings
@section @code{search_embeddings}
@cindex search_embeddings tool
@cindex semantic search

Embeds the query, loads @file{data/embeddings/index.json}, computes cosine
similarity against every stored entry, and returns the top-@var{k} matches.

@subsection Arguments

@table @code
@item query
@emph{Required.}  A natural-language query.

@item k
@emph{Optional.}  Number of results to return.  Default: @code{5}.
@end table

@subsection Returns

On success:
@example
@{
  "stdout": "[
    @{\"text\": \"...\", \"score\": 0.87@},
    ...
  ]",
  "stderr": "",
  "returncode": 0
@}
@end example

@subsection Dimension mismatch

If the index was built with a different model (e.g.@: the stub's 16-dimensional
vectors vs.@: Ollama's 2048-dimensional vectors), cosine similarity returns
@code{0.0} for all comparisons and the search result is meaningless.
Clear the index to fix this:

@example
echo "[]" > data/embeddings/index.json
@end example

Then re-embed your content.  @xref{Embedding Dimension Mismatch}.
