@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting
@cindex troubleshooting

This chapter covers the most common failures you are likely to encounter,
their root causes, and how to fix them.

@menu
* Agent Returns plan_error::        The planner could not produce a valid plan.
* Model Timeout::                   Inference takes too long and the call fails.
* HTTP 500 from Ollama::            The Ollama runner crashes mid-inference.
* Invalid JSON from Planner::       The model wraps output in code fences.
* Safety Rejection::                A plan step is blocked by the safety engine.
* Embedding Dimension Mismatch::    Old stub vectors mix with new real vectors.
* Web Search Returns No Results::   The DuckDuckGo scraper finds nothing.
* Pytest Cannot Import agent::      The package is not installed in the venv.
@end menu


@node Agent Returns plan_error
@section Agent Returns @code{plan_error}
@cindex plan_error

The agent prints something like:

@example
@{"status": "plan_error", "error": "LLM returned empty output"@}
@end example

@table @strong
@item Cause: no LLM backend configured
Neither @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} nor @env{OPENAI_API_KEY} is set.

@emph{Fix:} set @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}:
@example
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

@item Cause: Ollama server is not running
@env{OLLAMA_MODEL} is set but @code{curl http://localhost:11434/api/tags}
returns @samp{Connection refused}.

@emph{Fix:} start the server:
@example
ollama serve
# or: sudo systemctl start ollama
@end example

@item Cause: model not pulled
@env{OLLAMA_MODEL} names a model that is not installed.

@emph{Fix:} pull it:
@example
ollama pull qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

@item Cause: request timed out
The model is too slow for the hardware.  See @ref{Model Timeout}.
@end table


@node Model Timeout
@section Model Timeout
@cindex timeout, model inference
@cindex CPU-only inference speed

On CPU-only hardware, inference is much slower than on a machine with a GPU.
The table below shows measured timings on an Intel i7-8550U (2018 laptop CPU)
with the 3B model:

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .35 .35
@headitem Phase @tab Time @tab Notes
@item Prefill (361 tokens) @tab ~231 s @tab Processing the input prompt
@item Generation (67 tokens) @tab ~58 s @tab Producing the output JSON
@item Total (first run) @tab ~290 s @tab ~5 minutes end-to-end
@end multitable

@noindent
The first call after starting the server is the slowest because the model
loads from disk into RAM.  Subsequent calls skip the load step.

@strong{Do not use @code{stream=False}} when calling the Ollama API on slow
hardware.  With streaming disabled, the HTTP connection sits silent for the
entire prefill phase before the first byte arrives, causing a read timeout.
Codebud uses @code{stream=True} internally to avoid this.

@strong{If timeouts persist:}

@itemize
@item Switch to a smaller model (@pxref{Choosing a Model}): the 1.5B model
is 3--4x faster than the 3B on the same CPU.
@item Check that no other process is competing for RAM --- another model
loaded by Ollama will slow inference significantly.
@item On Arch Linux, set the CPU governor to @samp{performance} mode:
@example
sudo cpupower frequency-set -g performance
@end example
@item Reduce context pressure by lowering @code{num_predict} (maximum
output tokens) in the Ollama options.
@end itemize


@node HTTP 500 from Ollama
@section HTTP 500 from Ollama
@cindex HTTP 500
@cindex Ollama runner crash

If Ollama returns HTTP 500 and the server log (@file{/tmp/ollama.log} or
@command{journalctl -u ollama}) shows the runner process exiting, the most
likely cause is the Linux OOM (out-of-memory) killer terminating the runner
mid-inference.

@strong{Diagnosis:}

@example
dmesg | grep -i "killed process\|oom"
free -h
@end example

@strong{Fixes:}

@itemize
@item Close other large applications to free RAM.
@item Switch to a smaller model that fits more comfortably in available RAM.
@item Reduce the Ollama KV-cache size (set @code{num_ctx} to 2048 instead
of 4096 in the @code{options} block of the API request).
@item Do not load two models simultaneously --- Ollama keeps a model in RAM
until its keep-alive timeout expires (default 5 minutes).  Run
@command{ollama list --running} to see what is loaded.
@end itemize


@node Invalid JSON from Planner
@section Invalid JSON from Planner
@cindex JSON parsing, code fences
@cindex code fences, markdown

Some models wrap their JSON output in markdown code fences:

@example
```json
@{"status": "ok", "plan": [...]@}
```
@end example

Codebud's planner strips these fences automatically before parsing.  If
you see @code{"error": "LLM returned invalid JSON"} despite the model
returning something, check that @code{LLMPlanner._strip_code_fence} is
present in @file{agent/planner.py} --- it may have been removed by a
merge or revert.

If the model returns something other than JSON entirely (reasoning text,
an apology, etc.), the prompt needs tuning.  The planner prompt instructs
the model to return JSON only; some models ignore this for complex
requests.  Simplify the request or switch to a larger model.


@node Safety Rejection
@section Safety Rejection
@cindex safety engine, rejection
@cindex plan step rejected

The planner may return:

@example
@{"status": "plan_error", "error": "LLM returned malformed plan"@}
@end example

This can mean a plan step was rejected by the @code{SafetyEngine}.
The engine blocks any @code{command} step whose @code{cmd} does not
start with a prefix listed in @file{config/harmless_commands.json} or
@file{config/powerful_commands.json}.

@strong{To diagnose:}

Use the @command{plan} subcommand to inspect what the planner produced
without executing anything:

@example
codebud plan --json "your request here"
@end example

This prints the raw JSON plan (or the error) so you can see exactly
which tool and @code{cmd} the planner chose.  Alternatively, call the
Python API directly:

@example
python -c "
from agent.core import AgentCore
import json
a = AgentCore()
plan = a.planner.generate_plan('your request here')
print(json.dumps(plan, indent=2))
"
@end example

If the plan contains a @code{command} step with an unexpected @code{cmd},
either:

@itemize
@item Add the command prefix to @file{config/harmless_commands.json} if it
is genuinely safe.
@item Rephrase the request so the planner uses a different tool (e.g.
@code{file_read} instead of @code{cat}).
@end itemize


@node Embedding Dimension Mismatch
@section Embedding Dimension Mismatch
@cindex embedding dimension mismatch

If you used Codebud before the real Ollama embedding backend was wired up,
@file{data/embeddings/index.json} may contain 16-dimensional stub vectors.
New embeddings are 2048-dimensional.  Cosine similarity between entries of
different sizes returns 0.0, making search results incorrect.

@strong{Fix:} clear the index and re-embed your content:

@example
echo "[]" > data/embeddings/index.json
@end example

Then re-run whatever pipeline populated the index.


@node Web Search Returns No Results
@section Web Search Returns No Results
@cindex web search, no results
@cindex DuckDuckGo

If @code{WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED=1} is set but the tool returns an empty list,
DuckDuckGo Lite's HTML structure may have changed, breaking the regex
scraper.

@strong{To diagnose:}

@example
python -c "
import requests
r = requests.post('https://lite.duckduckgo.com/lite/',
    data=@{'q': 'test'@},
    headers=@{'User-Agent': 'Mozilla/5.0'@}, timeout=10)
print(r.text[:2000])
"
@end example

Look for @samp{result-link} and @samp{result-snippet} class names.  If
they have changed, update the regex patterns in
@file{agent/tools/web_search.py:_ddg_search}.


@node Pytest Cannot Import agent
@section Pytest Cannot Import @code{agent}
@cindex pytest, ImportError
@cindex editable install

If @command{pytest} reports:

@example
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'agent'
@end example

The package is not installed in the active virtual environment.  Fix:

@example
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -e ".[dev]"
pytest -q
@end example

Make sure you are running @command{pytest} from the repository root and that
the venv is active (your prompt shows @samp{(.venv)}).
