@node Usage
@chapter Usage
@cindex usage

This chapter explains how to use Codebud from the command line.  It
covers every subcommand, the interactive chat mode, how to read the
output, and how to get help when something goes wrong.

@menu
* Overview::                    What Codebud does with your request.
* Quick Start::                 The five-minute path to your first result.
* Subcommands::                 Reference for every subcommand.
* The run Subcommand::          Plan and execute a request in one step.
* The plan Subcommand::         Inspect a plan without running it.
* The chat Subcommand::         Multi-turn interactive session.
* The doctor Subcommand::       Check your environment before running.
* The models Subcommand::       See what models are downloaded.
* The config Subcommand::       Show the resolved configuration.
* The version Subcommand::      Show version information.
* Progress Output::             Understanding the spinner and token counter.
* Reading a Plan::              What the plan display means.
* Reading Step Results::        What a step outcome looks like.
* Verbose and JSON Output::     Getting more (or less) detail.
* Global Options::              --no-progress, --verbose.
* Environment Variables::       The variables that control behaviour.
* Backwards Compatibility::     Old invocation style still works.
@end menu


@node Overview
@section Overview
@cindex agent loop

When you run Codebud with a natural-language request, it goes through
four stages:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Plan} --- The LLM reads your request and the list of available
tools.  It produces a JSON plan: an ordered list of steps, each
specifying a tool name, a description, and the arguments to pass to
that tool.

@item
@strong{Validate} --- The safety engine inspects every step in the plan.
Steps that would run commands not listed in the safety policy are
rejected before anything executes.

@item
@strong{Execute} --- The executor runs each step in order, collecting
the output (standard output, standard error, return code, or file
contents).

@item
@strong{Remember} --- The memory store records what happened so that
future requests in the same session can reference it.
@end enumerate

The @command{run} subcommand performs all four stages automatically.
The @command{plan} subcommand stops after stage 2 so you can inspect
the plan before committing to execution.  The @command{chat} subcommand
repeats all four stages across multiple turns using a single persistent
agent instance.

@strong{Timing:} On CPU-only hardware (for example, an Intel
i7-8550U laptop), the planning stage takes approximately 4--6 minutes
for the recommended 3B model.  This is normal.  Codebud shows a live
progress indicator so you can see that it is working.
(@pxref{Progress Output}).


@node Quick Start
@section Quick Start
@cindex quick start

Before running Codebud, make sure the Ollama server is running and the
model is downloaded.  If you are unsure, run:

@example
codebud doctor
@end example

If all checks pass, send your first request:

@example
OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M \
    codebud run "list the Python files in the current directory"
@end example

You will see a spinner while the model thinks, then a numbered plan, then
the results of each step.  That is all there is to a basic run.

To avoid typing the model name every time, export it in your shell:

@example
export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
codebud run "list the Python files in the current directory"
@end example

Add the @code{export} line to @file{~/.zshrc} (or @file{~/.bashrc}) to
make it permanent.


@node Subcommands
@section Subcommands
@cindex subcommands

Codebud organises its functionality into subcommands:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@headitem Subcommand @tab Purpose
@item @command{run} @tab Plan and auto-execute a request (most common)
@item @command{plan} @tab Plan only --- inspect without executing
@item @command{chat} @tab Interactive multi-turn session
@item @command{doctor} @tab Check the environment
@item @command{models} @tab List downloaded Ollama models
@item @command{config} @tab Show resolved configuration
@item @command{version} @tab Show version information
@end multitable

All subcommands accept @option{--help} for a quick reminder:

@example
codebud run --help
@end example


@node The run Subcommand
@section The @command{run} Subcommand
@cindex run subcommand
@cindex executing a plan

@command{run} is the main way to use Codebud.  It sends your request to
the LLM, receives a plan, and executes every step automatically.

@example
codebud run "@var{your request}"
@end example

Example:

@example
codebud run "create a file called hello.py that prints Hello, world"
@end example

Codebud will:

@enumerate
@item
Show a live spinner while the model generates the plan.
@item
Print a numbered plan summary.
@item
Execute each step in sequence, printing a one-line outcome.
@end enumerate

If any step fails, Codebud stops, prints the error, and suggests a fix.


@node The plan Subcommand
@section The @command{plan} Subcommand
@cindex plan subcommand
@cindex inspecting a plan

@command{plan} generates a plan and prints it without executing anything.
Use it to check what Codebud @emph{intends} to do before letting it act.

@example
codebud plan "@var{your request}"
@end example

Example:

@example
codebud plan "delete all .pyc files"
@end example

To see the raw JSON instead of the formatted display:

@example
codebud plan --json "delete all .pyc files"
@end example

@noindent
The JSON format is exactly what the executor receives.  Each step has
the fields @code{id}, @code{description}, @code{tool}, and @code{args}.


@node The chat Subcommand
@section The @command{chat} Subcommand
@cindex chat subcommand
@cindex interactive session
@cindex multi-turn

@command{chat} opens an interactive session.  Each request you type
is planned and executed, and the memory store accumulates the history
across turns so Codebud can refer to what it did earlier in the same
session.

@example
codebud chat
@end example

After each plan is shown, @command{chat} walks you through every step
one at a time.  For each step you can press:

@table @kbd
@item y @key{RET}
Execute this step.
@item @key{RET} (or @kbd{n})
Skip this step without executing.
@item a @key{RET}
Execute this step and all remaining steps automatically.
@item q @key{RET}
Abort the current plan and return to the prompt.
@end table

To end the session, type @samp{quit} or press @kbd{Ctrl-D}.

@strong{Why use chat instead of run?}  When you are working through a
multi-step task interactively --- for example, exploring a codebase,
then editing a file, then running the tests --- @command{chat} lets
each turn build on the previous one.  Memory from earlier turns helps
the planner make better decisions.


@node The doctor Subcommand
@section The @command{doctor} Subcommand
@cindex doctor subcommand
@cindex environment check

@command{doctor} checks your environment and tells you what is wrong
before you try to run an agent call.  Run it any time things are not
working.

@example
codebud doctor
@end example

It checks:

@enumerate
@item Python version (3.10 or later required)
@item @code{agent} package importable (editable install present)
@item @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} environment variable is set
@item Ollama server is reachable on @code{http://localhost:11434}
@item The selected model has been pulled
@item @file{config/harmless_commands.json} and
      @file{config/powerful_commands.json} are valid JSON
@item Enough free disk space near @file{~/.ollama/models/}
@item Enough free RAM for the selected model
@end enumerate

Each failed check prints a one-line fix.  Example output when
@env{OLLAMA_MODEL} is not set:

@example
  [FAIL] OLLAMA_MODEL is not set
         -> Run: export OLLAMA_MODEL=qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
@end example

@strong{Run @command{doctor} first} whenever you see a
@code{plan_error} or a connection failure.  It saves time.


@node The models Subcommand
@section The @command{models} Subcommand
@cindex models subcommand

@command{models} lists all Ollama models that are currently downloaded
and marks which one is selected by @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}.

@example
codebud models
@end example

Example output:

@example
NAME                                       SIZE  SELECTED
  qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M        1.8G  <-- active
  qwen2.5-coder:7b-instruct-q4_K_M        4.7G
@end example

To switch models, change @env{OLLAMA_MODEL} (@pxref{Selecting a Model
in Codebud}).


@node The config Subcommand
@section The @command{config} Subcommand
@cindex config subcommand
@cindex resolved configuration

@command{config} prints the resolved value of every environment variable
Codebud reads, including the defaults it falls back to when a variable is
not set.

@example
codebud config
@end example

Example output:

@example
Codebud resolved configuration:
  OLLAMA_MODEL       = qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
  OLLAMA_BASE_URL    = http://localhost:11434
  EMBED_MODEL        = qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
  OPENAI_API_KEY     = (not set)
  WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED = 0
@end example

Use this to confirm that your exported variables are actually being
picked up by the shell.


@node The version Subcommand
@section The @command{version} Subcommand
@cindex version subcommand

@command{version} shows the Codebud version, the running Ollama server
version, the active model, and the Python version.

@example
codebud version
@end example

Example output:

@example
codebud  0.1.0
ollama   0.17.0
model    qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M
python   3.14.4
@end example

Include this output when reporting bugs.


@node Progress Output
@section Progress Output
@cindex progress indicator
@cindex spinner
@cindex prefill phase
@cindex token rate

When Codebud sends a request to the model, it displays a live progress
indicator in the terminal.  There are two phases:

@table @strong
@item Prefill phase (the slow part)
The model is processing your input prompt.  No output has arrived yet.
The display shows a spinning character and an elapsed-time counter:

@example
| Thinking... 47s (prefill)
@end example

On a CPU-only laptop, prefill for the 3B model with a typical planning
prompt takes 200--240 seconds.  @emph{This is normal.}  The model is not
frozen.

@item Generation phase
The model starts producing tokens.  The display switches to a token
counter and speed estimate:

@example
/ Generating... tokens: 42 | 1.1 t/s | 289s elapsed
@end example
@end table

When the model finishes, a summary line replaces the spinner:

@example
prefill: 231s | gen: 58s | total: 289s | tokens: 67 | 1.1 t/s
@end example

@noindent
The progress indicator is written to standard error, so it does not
interfere with piped output.  To suppress it entirely, pass
@option{--no-progress} or pipe stdout to another program (the indicator
is automatically disabled when stdout is not a terminal).


@node Reading a Plan
@section Reading a Plan
@cindex plan display
@cindex reading a plan

After the model finishes, Codebud prints a numbered plan summary.
Example:

@example
Plan (3 steps):
  [1] file_read          read README.md
  [2] command            run pytest -q
  [3] file_write         write test-summary.md
@end example

Each line shows the step number, the tool that will be used, and a
human-readable description.  The tool names correspond to the built-in
tools described in @ref{Tools Reference}.

If the model could not produce a valid plan, you will see:

@example
Plan error: LLM returned invalid JSON
  What happened: The model's output could not be parsed as JSON.
  How to fix:    Switch to a larger model for more reliable JSON.

Tip: run `codebud doctor` to check your environment.
@end example

The inline hint mirrors the @ref{Troubleshooting} chapter.


@node Reading Step Results
@section Reading Step Results
@cindex step results
@cindex execution output

After each step executes, Codebud prints a one-line outcome:

@example
  -> ok, 12 lines stdout
@end example

Or, if the step failed:

@example
  -> exit 1, stderr: pytest: no tests ran
@end example

Pass @option{--verbose} (or @option{-v}) to see the full standard output
of every step instead of the one-liner.


@node Verbose and JSON Output
@section Verbose and JSON Output
@cindex verbose output
@cindex JSON output

@table @option
@item --verbose / -v
Show the full stdout of each step rather than a one-line summary.
Useful for debugging, or when a step produces output you want to read.

@item --no-progress
Suppress the spinner entirely.  Useful when running Codebud from a
script or when redirecting output.

@item codebud plan --json "@var{request}"
Print the raw JSON plan instead of the formatted display.  Useful for
piping into other tools or for inspecting the exact @code{args} the
planner chose.
@end table


@node Global Options
@section Global Options
@cindex global options

The following options can be placed before the subcommand name:

@example
codebud [--no-progress] [--verbose] @var{subcommand} ...
@end example

@table @option
@item --no-progress
Disable the live spinner and timing summary.  The agent still runs;
only the progress display is suppressed.

@item --verbose / -v
Print full step output instead of one-line summaries.  In
@command{chat} mode this applies to all steps in the session.

@item --help / -h
Print a usage summary and exit.
@end table


@node Environment Variables
@section Environment Variables
@cindex environment variables

All Codebud behaviour is controlled through environment variables.
There are no configuration files to edit.

@table @env
@item OLLAMA_MODEL
@strong{Required.}  The model name exactly as it appears in
@command{ollama list} (and @command{codebud models}).  Example:
@code{qwen2.5-coder:3b-instruct-q4_K_M}.

@item OLLAMA_BASE_URL
The base URL of the Ollama REST API.  Default:
@code{http://localhost:11434}.  Change this only if Ollama is running
on a different machine or port.

@item EMBED_MODEL
The model to use for generating embeddings (used by the memory and
search tools).  Defaults to the value of @env{OLLAMA_MODEL}.

@item OPENAI_API_KEY
When set, Codebud falls back to the OpenAI API if Ollama is not
reachable.  The model used is @code{gpt-3.5-turbo} unless overridden
by @env{OPENAI_MODEL}.

@item OPENAI_MODEL
The OpenAI model to use when @env{OPENAI_API_KEY} is set.
Default: @code{gpt-3.5-turbo}.

@item WEB_SEARCH_ENABLED
Set to @code{1} to enable outbound DuckDuckGo web searches.
Default: @code{0} (disabled).  When disabled, the @code{web_search}
tool reports itself as unavailable to the planner.
@end table

The @command{config} subcommand prints the resolved values of all
these variables (@pxref{The config Subcommand}).


@node Backwards Compatibility
@section Backwards Compatibility
@cindex backwards compatibility

Before subcommands were introduced, Codebud was invoked as:

@example
python run_agent.py "your request"
@end example

Both the old style and the new subcommand style still work:

@example
codebud "your request"          @r{(maps to @command{run})}
codebud run "your request"      @r{(equivalent)}
python run_agent.py "your request"  @r{(still works)}
@end example

The @option{-i} / @option{--interactive} flag from the old interface is
replaced by the @command{chat} subcommand, which provides the same
step-by-step approval flow with a more natural REPL interface.
