\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename codebud.info
@settitle Codebud Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@copying
This manual documents Codebud @value{VERSION}, a local Cursor-style coding
agent powered by Ollama and Qwen2.5-Coder.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Mohammadreza Khellat.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the
license is available at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Codebud Manual
@subtitle A Local Cursor-Style Coding Agent
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Mohammadreza Khellat
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Codebud

@insertcopying

This manual is divided into the following chapters:

@menu
* Introduction::            What Codebud is and who it is for.
* Installation::            Setting up the environment.
* Model Management::        Downloading, selecting, and transferring LLM models.
* LLM Execution Lifecycle:: How models load, tokenize, prefill, and generate.
* Performance Benchmarking:: Concrete timing measurements with full evidence.
* Usage::                   Running the agent from the command line and OpenClaw.
* Configuration::           Environment variables and config files.
* Architecture::            How the components fit together.
* Tools Reference::         Every built-in tool documented.
* Safety and Sandbox::      How Codebud limits what the LLM can do.
* Development::             Adding tools, running tests, iterating on prompts.
* Troubleshooting::         Common failures and how to fix them.
* Glossary::                Key terms defined.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@include chapters/introduction.texi
@include chapters/installation.texi
@include chapters/model-management.texi
@include chapters/llm-execution.texi
@include chapters/performance-benchmarking.texi
@include chapters/usage.texi
@include chapters/configuration.texi
@include chapters/architecture.texi
@include chapters/tools-reference.texi
@include chapters/safety-and-sandbox.texi
@include chapters/development.texi
@include chapters/troubleshooting.texi
@include chapters/glossary.texi

@bye
